13 die of cholera in Karonga as the disease affects 235 others

Health officials in Karonga are blaming fishermen for the continued cases of the deadly cholera disease in the lakeshore district.
Cholera ravages
Lewis Tukula, a district environmental health officer said there are continued cases of cholera in some areas in the district because fishermen are not cooperating on hygiene practices.



“So far 13 people have died and we have treated 235 people mostly in camps where fishermen stay.
“The camps have no toilets and they use lake water for drinking. We have been engaging them to dig toilets, not to drink lake water and embrace hygiene practices but they are not cooperating,” he said.
Tukula said the district will be registering more cholera cases if the fishermen continue to disregard health advices.
The disease is under full control in Mangochi, Zomba and Nkhata Bay among other districts hit by cholera during the rainy season.

Alarming rate of ARVs defaulters among women in Nsanje

Friends of Aids Support Trust (FAST) has embarked on a campaign in Nsanje district mobilizing men to take a leading role in the fight against gender based violence and new HIV and Aids infections.
Aids patients urged not to default ARV treatment
Score Project Officer, Mweta Katemba said in an interview they are rolling out the project following rampant reports of GBV cases among women in the district.
He said gender based violence has  had a hand on HIV and Aids transmission citing cultural practices in which men are hired for sexual cleansing as one of the cases of GBV facing the women.
Katemba said they are targeting men as they have misconception of knowing everything thereby abusing women leading to gender based violence besides encouraging new HIV and Aids infections.
“Here in Nsanje, there is an issue of sexual cleansing; women are forced to sleep with hired men as a result women are prone to contracting HIV and Aids.



“Not only that, once they are forced to do such sexual cleansing, they are sexually abused. So we want to mobilize men so that they can know that they have responsibility of protecting women from contracting the pandemic.
Katemba revealed that the initiative will try to address gender based violence that encourages the spread of HIV and Aids such as defilement which is rampant in the district.
He further explained that according to court records, cases of defilement in the district are rampant and men are the most perpetrators. He said he believe that engaging men will try to address issues of GBV but also new cases of HIV and Aids.
Nsanje District Health Office HIV and Aids Coordinator, Mac Knowledge Tembo commended FAST for the campaign aimed at stopping incidents of Gender Based Violence among women in the lower shire district through the Score project.
Tembo deplored high HIV and Aids treatment default rate especially among women which he described as worrisome as 35 percent of the people who were put on treatment have been lost to care.
Tembo said the situation is putting a strain on efforts to achieve the 90-90-90 goal which among other things seeks to reduce the HIV and Aids transmission by ensuring that 90 percent of the people on treatment should have their viral load suppressed.
“Lack of support on the part of men is a major contributing factor for most of the women who are on HIV and Aids care to default treatment. About 35 percent of the women who were put on treatment have been lost to care.
“In some instances, in situations of cell discordant where a woman tests positive, some men have been divorcing their wives.
“ I am sure that engaging men to take a leading role in the fight against HIV and Aids could help iron out such problems. Therefore, the Score project will help to address such issues,” said Tembo.
The UNAIDS 90-90-90 target calls on countries to reach the following goals by 2020; 90 percent of all people living with HIV will know their HIV status, 90 percent of all people diagnosed with HIV infection will receive sustained antiretroviral therapy,  90 percent of all people receiving antiretroviral therapy will have viral suppression.

Alone in one of the most terrible parts of the world, Chilemba does us proud: Malawi ‘Golden Boy’

Malawian boxer Isaac Chilemba, though he lost to Russian Sergey Kovalev on Monday night through points, should still be regarded as our hero. He was alone out there in one of the most terrible parts of the world in Ekaterinburg, Russia.
Chilemba with Malawi flag
He not only lasted the distance but media reports suggest that the judges may have been slightly harsh in their 117-110, 116-111 and 118-109 decision.
Here is one man from the ghetto of Ndirande Township we can be proud of for trying a shot at three  world light-heavyweights titles, WBA, IBF and WBO and prove his mettle by recovering from a seventh round knockdown to survive up to the 12th round.
Chilemba is proving to be a stubborn opponent — he also controversially lost his previous fight on points to Eleider Alvarez in November andon Monday night, he is reported to have technically outshone his Russian opponent.



Kovalev had his Russian crowd behind him but Chilemba stood firm all the way to the last round.
He is our hero and he is determined to carry our flag higher. But I guess coming from such a backward country like ours, though he is associated with South Africa, he does have some disadvantages.
In my opinion, these bouts are staged. Look, even before this fight it was assumed this was going to be a walkover for Kovalev because it was judged to be a mismatch for the Russian.
Writing in Boxing News last week, boxing expert Allan Fox said Chilemba’s youth at 29 isn’t enough advantage “for him to gain any real advantage in this fight because he likely won’t be around by the later rounds anyway due to the shots he’s going to be getting hit with by Kovalev.”
The focus was on Kovalev’s next fight — to defend the same WBA, IBF and WBO world light-heavyweights titles against former champion Andre Ward on November 19.
This was like a formality fight because Kovalev had already arranged the November bout against Ward, which was clearly a total disrespect to Chilemba.
It could have been staged that Chilemba should lose this fight, I mean how else could he have survived all the 12 rounds. If Kovalev was up to it, he should habe knocked out Chilemba to prove his mettle that his best chaĺlenge is against Ward.
All in all, let’s congratulate our own Chilemba, who has lasted the distance and as of July 2016, the former IBO super-middleweight and WBC International light-heavyweight champion, is ranked by The Ring magazine as the world’s seventh best light-heavyweight.
And for youngsters aspiring to achieve Chilemba’s status, continue working hard because he did not reach this far on a silver platter — he met the best and beat them to earn recognition from the world that catapulted him to set foot in Russia against one of their best boxers.

Chakwera calls for action on Malawi ‘grand corruption’ scandal: No impunity

The opposition Malawi Congress Party President, Dr Lazarus Chakwera has advised the Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) to quickly act on t the network responsible for biggest financial scandal in Malawi’s history. Known as “cashgate”,  after there have been fears that about seven ministers who are implicared will escape justice.
Chakwera says no impunity in delaing with grand corruption
Chakwera said  those involved in the scandal  should not  escape the reach of the law even if they are  in the corridors of power.
The opposisiton leader said this while addressing a political rally at Thavite School Ground in the area of Traditional Authority Mwanza in Salima District.
“We are told that the office of the Auditor General has handed over the forensic audit [conducted by RSM Risk Assurance LLP of the UK covering 2009 to 2014 ]  report to the ACB. The ACB should quickly act on the report despite that some people are still working under fear of seeing what their friend  Issa Njaunju saw, do your job,” said Chakwera.
He was apparently referring the the murder of ACB official Njaunju whose investigations police say is complicated as many believed it was regime thugs who took away his life in a brutual manner.
Chakwera said Malawians are keenly waiting for action for all the shoddy deals that involved civil servants and businesses.
The reports says there are $14.2 million in overpayments for goods and services; one duplicate payment of $5.45 million which the report says should be subject to immediate recovery; and $29 166 overpayment on shipping to wrong locations.



Chakwera said “there should be no impunity” for those involved in stealing from the state.
“That’s why if we are asking ACB to conclude the what Auditor General has already found bring all the culprits to book so , lets endt a culture of impunity,” said Chakwera.
Chakwera said Malawi Civil Service was very trusted in the Kamuzu Banda regime.
“Go in locations you will find that the former Civil Servants are poor and compare them with the current civil servants they are already rich even after working for few years, where are they getting money? ” said Chakwera.
“The new crop of civil servants are driving top range of vehicles, building good houses, they are stealing your money.”
Chakwera then demonstrated a practical example of corruption at GreenBelt  Authority(GBA).
“We have been passing budget for GBA for long time but have you benefited from the initiative you people of Salima,” queried Chakwera.
Chakwera has since advised President Peter Mutharika to address the corruption which is draining a lot of public resources.
“ The money  that is wrongfully been used for self-enrighment should be used to help reduce poverty in Malawi and to raise living standards for all citizens,” said Chakwera.
Parliament  is, through the Public Accounts Committee, reportedly supposed to further debate the ‘grand corruption’ forensic report with the Auditor Genearl this week.
Civil society is demanding President Mutharika to sack the ministers implicated in the mismanagement of the funds.
However, many believe it is more likely that Malawians will see the culprits being prosecuted, including the role of ministers and senior officials in the Mutharika-led government.
The forensic audit of the financial years 2009-2014 was carried out in two phases. In a first phase, PwC on behalf of the National Audit Office of Malawi checked whether the statements from government bank accounts matched with entries in Ifmis.
The analysis showed that 43 percent of payments reflected in the government bank statements were not accounted for in Ifmis.
These are $14.2 million in overpayments for goods and services; one duplicate payment of $5.45 million which the report says should be subject to immediate recovery; and $29 166 overpayment on shipping to wrong locations.

Chakwera concedes Malawi main opposition MCP facing wrangles

Main opposition Malawi Congress Party (MCP) president Lazarus Chakwera has conceded there are a myriad of problems rocking the party.
Rev Dr Lazarus Chakwera: MCP president says indeed there is political feud
This comes after two senior legislators; Salima South MP Felix Jumbe and Salima east MP Jessie Kabwila were chased from a political rally held by Chakwera in Salima on Sunday.
Jumbe is director of research in MCP and also shadow cabinet minister of Agriculture whilst Kabwila is party spokesperson and shadow cabinet minister of Gender.
“There are indeed problems in my party but these problems have not diStracted me and I will never be distracted. I will ensure that all party officials walk together,” he said.
He said the issue of Jumbe and Kabwila will be discuissed at a senior party officials caucus.
This is tthe first time that Chalwera has conceded the government in waiting is sailing in troubled waters.



Jumbe confirmed that an official from the party to him and Kabwila to leave the podium at the rally in their home district where Chakwera was addressing a political rally.
“We are seen as very outspoken just because we tell the truth, they are making allegations that we have joined the DPP but that is not true,” he said.
He said him and Kabwila will always be MCP. Jumbe and Chakwera, who used to sit on the front line of the MCP benches as senior party members, have now been pushed to the back of the benches since the start of the meeting of parliament.

Cheaters: Zodiak announcer arrested over brawl after being found with married woman

An announcer at private Zodiak Broadcasting Service, Joe Mwase, and his secret married lover, Rita Chaima, spent last night at Kawale Police Station following a fight he picked with the lover’s husband.



Mwase being led into a cell at Kawale Police
Our source reveals that the woman’s husband, Arnold Flao, has been asking his wife about her affair with Mwase but she  kept on denying the rumours.
Rita has been married to Flao for 12 years and they have three children while Mwase’s wife left her matrimonial home over her husband’s infidelity with Rita.
The source said when Rita knocked off from her work place at Lilongwe Department of Road Traffic and Safety, she jumped into a friend’s car heading to Mwase’s house.
“Flao was tipped that his wife was heading to Mwase’s house instead of their home at Area 18. He followed her and found her with Mwase in the house. Flao pummelled Mwase defacing him badly. And a chase ensued until Mwase’s car plunged into a ditch.
“The police picked them all but only detained Mwase and Rita, over night,” said the source.
According to the source, Flao has been trailing the wife for two years now and he was just waiting for concrete evidence which he has found.
Police said they are invetstigating the matter and questioning all parties before commenting.

Chilemba beaten on points by Russian Kovalev: Malawi ‘Golden Boy’ proves he is a stubborn opponent

Malawian boxer Isaac Chilemba lost to Russian Sergey Kovalev on Monday night through points — 117-110, 116-111 and 118-109 in Ekaterinburg, Russia during their WBA Super, WBO and IBF world light-heavyweight titles.



Chilemba is the stubborn opponent
Russian Kovalev beats Chilemba
Chilemba with Malawi flag
But media reports suggest that Chilemba forced Kovalev to go the distance for just the fourth time in his career by recovering from a seventh round knockdown to survive up to the 12th round, in which the judges may have been slightly harsh in their decision.
The reports say although the Russian crowd tried to roar their man to a last-gasp stoppage, Chilemba stood firm to bring in an assessment from the judges that may have been slightly harsh.
According to espn.go.com, Chilemba proved a stubborn opponent and that at times he technically outshone the Russian.
“Chilemba, 29, had lost his previous fight — controversially on points to Eleider Alvarez in November — in a WBC world title eliminator. Despite that setback, Chilemba still got his shot at Kovalev’s WBA, IBF and WBO world light-heavyweights titles and proved a stubborn opponent,” reports espn.go.com.
“Chilemba (24-4-2, 10 KOs) recovered from a seventh round knockdown to force Kovalev to go the distance for just the fourth time in his career. Only Bernard Hopkins had managed to go to points with Kovalev in eight previous world title fights after a disappointing and unimaginative display from the Russian.”
It is reported that Chilemba was having some degree of success in ducking under the Russian’s assaults and although two firm Kovalev right hands drew applause from the crowd, Chilemba landed intelligently to get on the scoreboard in the third.
“The visitor’s corner — marshalled by female trainer Jodi Solomon in the absence of Buddy McGirt — were further encouraged at the start of round four as Chilemba frustrated his man with his subtle movement and long but pacy jabs,”  the report said.
“Kovalev cut a slightly disconsolate figure at the start the fifth and, although he tried to step on the gas immediately, he was reminded by a lightning Chilemba counter that more guile was required.
“Russian fans were eventually awoken by a decent Kovalev jab but for the second time in the session, Chilemba responded with a neat right uppercut on the inside. The champion then registered a right uppercut-to-left hook combination but had to eat a crisp Chilemba left hook before again turning the tide in the following round.
“Chilemba’s work-rate began to drop in the seventh round as Kovalev sought to reward his loyal supporters with more to cheer about. Hope came quickly, as their hero teed his man up with a vicious left to the body and then uncorked a textbook one-two. Chilemba collapsed in stages before rising to see out the final 20 seconds of the round.
“The eighth was not initially the fireworks show that onlookers expected but Kovalev finally found the target again with a trio of stinging lefts followed by some one-way traffic. Chilemba gamely made it to the ninth and may even have pinched that round; earning at least a sign of recognition from his opponent.
“Kovalev’s own energy levels appeared to be dipping with Chilemba re-establishing some semblance of rhythm early in the 10th, and there was an audible gasp when Kovalev visited the canvas having slipped. Left and right hooks to the body saw Chilemba narrow the gap; only to appear to require a breather in an uneventful penultimate round.
“The final session began with a respectful touch of hands and one of its more remarkable moments was the two wrestling each other to the floor. Although the crowd tried to roar their man to a last-gasp stoppage, Chilemba stood firm to bring in an assessment from the judges that may have been slightly harsh,” the report said.
The victory now sets up a big bout for Kovalev against American Andre Ward at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas on November 19. The undefeated former super-middleweight world champion Ward (29-0, 15 KO) will have to overcome Alexander Brand (25-1, 19 KOs) on August 6 in his own interim bout before the fight with Kovalev is confirmed.
“The fight with Ward has become a more interesting prospect after Florida-based Kovalev failed to dominate the first half of the fight against a plucky challenger,” the report said.

Evangelist Kalonga wins international special recognition award

A prophet is without honour in his or her own homeland, they say, and it may sound an overused and somewhat boring cliché but this adage cannot be further from the truth for UK-based Malawian female charismatic preacher, Evangelist Elizabeth Kalonga.
Kalonga speaking after getting an award
Award winners show
While her compatriots from the homeland, Malawi vilify and exaggeratedly overlook her and her philanthropic services to mankind, the international community recognises and appreciates her concerted efforts and hard work towards her contribution to helping the needy and her services to mankind.
Evangelist Kalonga may not have the honour and recognition she duly deserves among her countrymen and women but the international community acknowledges her efforts and appreciates her acts of benevolence, selflessness and dedication to her services onto the humankind.
The outspoken woman of God, Evangelist Kalinga has been decorated with the 2016 glamorous International Extraordinary Lady Speaks Conference Star humanitarian Award for being one of the most outstanding women in Africa and for dedicating her life to  helping and giving hope to people living with HIV and Aids, the disabled, deprived Children and vulnerable African women both in the UK and in Malawi.
Founder and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) for in Love and Faith Project, a UK registered charity, received her gong at the weekend in London at a white carpet event which attracted a myriad host of motivational speakers and humanitarians and notable personalities on the global stage.
“I am so humbled and at the same time overwhelmingly honoured for winning this award. This is a great moment for me and a great achievement for the people I serve because they are the real winners of this award,” said a visibly ecstatic Pastor Kalonga.
She added: “For me, God called me to his ministry to do his work and I am elated and overly content that in a small way I can help change other people’s lives for the better through God’s works. I am not qualified to do the work rather God qualifies my work for the good of mankind. Glory be to God.”
Luton based Evangelist Kalonga thanked the organisers of the event for the honour saying the award gives her courage and enthusiasm to continue doing the Lord’s work.
“This award gives me the much-needed oomph and drive to forge ahead and even do more. I would like to register my heartfelt gratitude to the organisers of the awards for recognising and appreciating what we do,” said Evangelist Kalonga.
During the awards presentation, another prestigious award was handed over to Imambay Kadie Kamara, the founder and chief executive the for an international NGO for the disabled people, The disabled foundation international, Sierra Leone.



The International  Extraordinary lady Speaks Conference is a day dedicated to hearing the amazing stories of highly inspirational women who implemented strength, willpower and resilience to overcome adversity and go on to enrich not just their lives but the lives of all those around them.
The highlight of the event was the Lift Effect STAR awards presented to women who had been nominated by those whose lives they had significantly impacted upon and above all else, among the STAR award recipients were some outstanding women who gave amazing presentations.
Of late, Kalonga has been vocal fighting injustices against and rigorously promotes the rights of people living with HIV and Aids, Gays and Lesbians (homosexuals) people with albinism, the disabled, vulnerable children and women.
Recently the flamboyant cleric argued President Peter Mutharika and the Malawi government to engage an extra gear in the fight against the ongoing senseless killings of people with albinism saying enough of lip service has been paid and that now is the time to act tough.
Evangelist Kalonga appealed to the faith leaders, NGO’s and the traditional authorities in the country to get back to basics teaching them to love ane another and to always trust and ensure that there is love and faith among the commonest of the citizenry in the country.

Exodus! Malawi opposition MPs walk out of Parliament over Land Bill

Opposition member of parlaiment on Tuesday walked  out of the House after disagreements with goverment  MPs on the Land Bill. Only government MPs left in the chamber and the bill has been passed.



Empty opposition benches after they all walked out of Parliament
The opposition MPs were against some of the amendments in the Land bill and the progress of debate on the matter with the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) dictating the debate.
Opposition MPs argued that the amended close was not favouring the poor Malawians and they accused Minister of Land and Housing Atupele Muluzi of betraying the House.
The situation went out of hand when Second Deputy Speaker Clement Chiwaya called for division on the matter without hearing what the opposition MPs were saying on the matter.
This did not please the opposition MPs who decided to walk out of the chamber.
Parliament is expected to rise on Friday after a week long extension.
Leader of the House George Chaponda said there are many bills which need to be tackled before parliament rises which include the Access to Information bill.
The one week extension of parliament has cost the government unbudgetted K67.5 million in allowances for the 193 legislators who get a whopping K50000 per day each in addition to the K1.5 million basic salary.

Expect mass protests! Malawi CSOs petition President to fire 7 ministers implicated in ‘grand corruption’

Malawi may face mass protests of citizens with a petition to President Peter Mutharika to fire seven ministers, who have been implicated in the suspected K577 billion Cashgate, to ensure  more conclusive investigations and prosecution.
Mayaya: Let Mutharika fire the rotten ministers
The civil society groups want President Mutharika to fire all cabinet ministers who are callously draining  the economy, enrighing themselves while ordinary citizens starve.
An initiative called  #BetterMalawiNow! Is gaining momentum for  Mutharika– without fear of his trusted  party stawlats –  to act on the initial 13 files of the K577 billion audit that the National Audit Office (Nao) has submitted to the Anti- Corruption Bureau (ACB) .
The CSO, including Billy Mayaya, is calling to President Mutharika to walk the talk on one of the pillars of national development – integrity – by sacking the rotten  seven ministers.
“The seven and many others that might follow have in real sense defied your appeal for patriotism, hard work and integrity,” reads the petition to Mutharika.
“ They have enhanced your risk as head of state as well as personally of being a figurehead leader without commitment and dedication to the appeal to uphold principles of financial prudence,” the petition reads.



The petitioners, said they are persuaded to believe that wholesale robbery has been aided and abated by the sustained culture of disempowerment which has kept the masses ignorant, fearful, passive and subservient.
According to the activists, their biggest wonder is why the suspected ministers are still in service and why Mutharika has not made an official statement to that effect.
“Our take is that you are intent on protecting these individuals, by extending to them and misapplying and abusing the executive privilege, which by the way is also not absolute. That is our other reason for our outrage and anger, as it reflects a premeditated and deliberate action.
“We are grateful that the media released that report, convinced and duty bound that the rightful owners and beneficiaries of the national wealth being abused and looted – the citizenry needed to be told. The executive branch, Mr. President, has been cast into doubtful outlook, portrayed as criminally culpable, principally by shielding the seven in your Cabinet,” states the petition.
In a June 19 2015, NAO said the  audit analysis had identified significant discrepancies between payments made from government bank accounts and cashbook records held in the Integrated Financial Management and Information System (Ifmis), the government’s electronic payment system.
Revelations of the K577 billion cashgate came hot on the heels of a forensic audit report by British firm, RSM (formely called Baker Tilly), that established that K24 billion was looted from Capital Hill between April and September 2013 under the administration of Joyce Banda and her People’s Party (PP).
Banda is on record saying “ There must be a stubborn link between the MK577 billion scandal of 2009 and 2012 and the MK20 billion cashgate of 2013.”
The K577 billion cashgate audit report will be a stern test to President Peter Mutharika committement to fight corruption without fear or favour.
Corruption in Malawi is severe, well-known, cuts across many sectors, and is frequently debated and discussed in the media.
Such corruption undermines human rights in multiple ways: a direct defiance of the rule of law and accountability. By unlawfully interfering with resources that should be available to realize fundamental rights such as the rights to health, water, food, and education—either through illegally appropriating public funds for personal wealth or rendering access to services subject to bribes, which are illegal—corruption leads to violations of human rights that may have disastrous consequences.
Observers also note that lack of political will has crippled Malawi’s anti-corruption  bureau, undermining their efforts through political interference and threats.
Given Malawi’s political patronage system, it is highly unlikely that President Mutharika will put his trusted ministers in the dock .

FAWEMA introduces cash transfer programme for needy school girls

The Forum for African Women Educationalists in Malawi (FAWEMA) says it introduced cash transfer programme for needy adolescent girls in primary schools to help them complete their primary education.



Famewa starts cash transfer
According to Nelly Mngwaluko, FAWEMA project manager for the cash transfer programme for Mchinji, Malawi has fewer girls in school compared to boys because of many challenges faced by girls while at school.
She said the organization decided to give K5,000.00 to every poor girl in standard 7 and 8 every month to keep them in school.
“They may use this money to buy education related materials as well as torches for studying.
Learners spend a lot of hours in school so for an adolescent girl who is also in menstruation period, it will be difficult to go to and remain in school that’s why we gave them K5,000.00 every month to buy pads so that this menstruation should not be an excuse of dropping out of school,” said Mngwaluko during a District Executive Committee (DEC) briefing on the programme.
However, she disclosed to DEC that the programme also faced a lot of challenges to achieve its aim because even though the organization gives girls money to buy education related materials, they still drop out of school.
Not only that, the Project manager explained, “due to illiteracy they block their phone sim cards because of over use of pin codes. it can happen that they forget pin codes so they force it that leads to sim card being blocked which also gives us challenges to reach such girls.
The Forum for African Women Educationalists – Malawi Chapter – (FAWEMA) is a registered non- governmental organization, which brings together women educationalists in order to support and promote girls’ and women’s education in Malawi.
The Chapter was established in 1993 and was registered in March 2001 under the Trustees Incorporation Act, 1962.

Feek hike at University of Malawi is  economically insensitive, politically suicidal

TRUE, higher education has become, and will most surely continue to be, increasingly expensive to offer in this 21st century era. This is largely because offering of higher education is silently battling for competitiveness and relevance in this era. The need to balance low funding levels from government and the political calls to open up ‘access’ on one hand and the agitation for quality education coupled with rising costs of materials, and unsteady economies on the other has meant that administrators in higher education have got to seriously start thinking about lasting ways of mobilizing resources.



Chanco campus
To this end, administrators in higher education have resorted to fees hiking as a measureof mobilizing resources. Such measures, as South Africa’s ‘FeesMustFall’ movement readily provides example, have met with angry anti-fees-hike calls owing to the fact that the economy in many of the world’s countries are less favorable as to welcome such measures with a smile.
Malawi is no exception to this. The recent unpopular fee hike by University of Malawi (Unima) Council pretty much seems to be justified on the grounds above, though, sadly, the anti-fee-hike here will not be as fervent as that of our South African neighbors owing to unpalatable levels of individualism on part of students and pathetic dormancy on part of both guardians and education interest groups. Again, the lack of litigation culture and the rising levels of ‘new wisdom’—the bandwagon thinking that it’s about time Malawians stopped being used to freebies—will also add its fair share of the lack of fervency in the anti-fee-hike campaign.
For some enlightened social commentators, the Unima fee hike from K55,000 to K400,00(727%) and from K275,000 to K400,00 (154%) for the normal entry students and from K275,000 to K900,000 (327%) for the mature entry students is both economically insensitive and politically suicidal unless either there happens to be guarantees of loans for every student or the hike gets implemented incrementally.
Economically-insensitive?
Looking at the Unima fee hike from the lens of competitiveness and relevance, one can conclude that there is no doubt that the hike is every inch justifiable. In fact, the hike is long overdue if worries about lack of relevance as echoed by business gurus in the private business enterprises and the nation’s cries over Unima being on the lowest rung of the Africa University Ranking ladder are anything to go by. Indeed, as if echoing the language of competitiveness and relevance, in just less than a month ago the World Bank Report on the state of higher education in Malawi bemoaned Unima’s lack of relevance and competitiveness.
However, in as much as the fee hike is justifiable on the whole, it is nonetheless regrettable to raise the fees at such a time when the economy is in bad state. It would make sense if such a hike were a target to be achieved in, say, 4 years. In such kind of an arrangement, the fees would be hiked, for arguments’ purposes, from K55,000 and K275,000 to K300,000 starting next year and the remaining targeted K100,000 can be spread across three years to reach the targeted amount in the case of the normal entry students. In case of mature entry students, the fee hike would start, say at K500,000 and the remaining K400,000 be spread across three years to meet the targeted sum of K900,000. No doubt, such a fee hike as hypothesized here would most certainly be, at the risk of courting criticism, in accord with economic reality of Malawi as things are now.
It should be remembered that this incremental hike route is the same one Unima council adopted on the lecturers’ salary hike.  The story is like this: Unima Council and other interested parties commissioned an inquiry into the salaries of lecturers across the Southern African region. What emerged from this inquiry was that lecturers in Unima were the lowest paid and it was thus recommended that they get a 200% salary increment. The council was dodgy of this recommendation and the lecturers became pushy. What followed was a series of industrial strikes and threats of industrial strikes. The most notable industrial strike being in 2008 where the first years at Chancellor College at the time stayed for more than three months as orientation period because lecturers refused to allow continuing students to report on campus arguing that they would not teach. Sanity came back when Unima Council agreed with the lecturers to be raising their salaries incrementally until the targeted amount was reached. If Unima council, as some contemptuouslysay, “did it” then, they can also “did it”now.
Now given the raw truth that Unima has hiked the fees to the targeted K900,000 without regard to the current sickly state of our economy, one is only left with one and only one conclusion—that Unima wants university education to be for the rich only. With such fees as high as K900, 000 one can bet that no poor Malawian can realize his dream of stepping into the corridors of Unima colleges, never! Honestly speaking, as things are in our economy, the contestably best decision will be not to hike the fees at all.
Politically-suicidal?
There is no denying that the Unima Council fee hike does reflect what Unima wants for its constituent colleges. More importantly, the fee hike decision also reflects the education policies of the government of the day—Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), so to say. For quite some time now and over the campaign period DPP has been promising to develop and implement pro-poor policies. Indeed, the DPP has gone the whole hog championing its budget as being pro-poor. Besides, the DPP-led government has defended the infamous quota system policy on the basis of giving the poor access to higher education. The real test of the pro-poorness of its budget and policies, in as much as this is not the only test, is the way its policies affect the poor especially in the education sector which is largely believed to be a surefire way of evening out inequalities.
That university education irons out inequalities in the different spheres of life is well-settled. The inequalities in agriculture, health and all those other areas of life are best and easily equalized through university education. This is the reason why the world over people are relentlessly pushing for widening of access to university education. The booming online university education, the scholarships, and the education trusts are some of the progressive moves in this respect.
On the other hand, governments are also widening access through deliberate policies. For example, as elsewhere observed, the unpopular equitable access to higher education otherwise known as quota system is premised on the same principle of widening access. It is here that the Unima fee hike defeats the whole purpose of equitable access to higher education. If, as it is always said, the quota system of admission seeks to give the poor chances to access higher education then it necessarily follows that any unreasonable hiking of fees limits that access. Surely, it is of no meaning to be admitted and yet have no fees. That, truthfully speaking, is more or less giving with one hand and snatching it with the other.
The giving-snatching analogywill be the clear soon because the immediate fee hike from K55,000 to K275,000 has already seen a substantial number of needy students drop out of college. It was, for those that were still around attending classes despite the non-payment of fees, the directive of the president that gave a sigh of relief to most needy students.
In a nutshell, this Unima fee hike simply confirms the growing talk in town that DPP’s pro-poor policies are nothing but a lip-service. The opposition may be silent for now, but one can say for a fact that the opposition is keenly watching the events on the fee hike and seriously planning its 2019 elections campaign propaganda. And this fee hike will most obviously be a campaign issue in 2019 and some party will be made or broken on the basis of this issue.
The point being driven home here is this: the Unima fee hike is good news overall, however, it is as economically insensitive as it is politically suicidal. As the Malawi economy currently is, the less controversial way to go on this will be to hike the fees incrementally, though, and this is the good part of it, the economic realities on the ground favor that there should be zero increment till the economy stabilizes, and,given the state of our affairs,no one knowswhen.

Five-foot snake captured at Malawi Presidential palace

Presidential security detail in Lilongwe has captured a five-foot snake that was on the loose at Kamuzu Palace while President Peter Mutharika is away in Ethiopia.
The snake found at Kamuzu Palace
Snake ‘vistor’ at State House shot
Nyasa Times understand the snake was shot by the guards who feared it was venomous.
Police sources say there have been a number of snakes killed at Kamuzu Palace by the latest one was the largest.
President Muthatrika is away in Ethiopia and is expected to attend a ceremony at Millenium Hall, Addis Ababa University where he will be conferred Doctorate Degree of Letters, Honoris Causa.



He returns to the university at an occasion which coincides with a graduation ceremony at a school he taught in the 70s.
Mutharika who is Regional Universities Forum (RUFORUM) Champion for Higher Education, co-convener of the International Commission on Financing Global Education and Charles Nagel Professor of International and Comparative Constitutional Law Emeritus of the Washington University is expected address the assembly of congregants Saturday.

For decades, Malawian musician’s dream was to visit US, now at 86, he’s doing it


Decades ago, in Malawi, he sang the line: “If I had enough money, I would go to America.”
Giddes Chalamanda on a street corner in Washington. Credit Isabel Liabunya
Now, finally, it’s happening.
At 86, a superstar at home has set foot in the US capital — and made a big impression.
Fans back in Malawi got together earlier this year to raise money so that Giddes Chalamanda, who has had a musical career for nearly half a century, could realize his long-held dream.



And with help from the Malawi Washington Association in DC, Chalamanda was able to get to the States with a supporting band.
His country “rallied together” for Chalamanda, says one backer, Davis Njobvu, a lawyer and part-time musician in Malawi.
“This dream,” Njobvu says, “is something that everybody has known about for a long time. We’re trying to honor him while he’s alive and able to appreciate it.”
Njobvu, who was on the plane with Chalamanda, said the trip to the US was emotional and historic.
Chalamanda doesn’t speak English very well, but when asked his first impressions of America, he said simply: “It’s a very nice country. The people received me well … and I’m very glad.”
On Tuesday, he played “Buffalo Soldier” on a new stage — the Library of Congress.
The reception was fantastic, Njobvu says.
“A lot of Malawians flew in from different states just to come and see Mr. Giddes Chalamanda because he’s like an icon.”
 Thoko Kachipande,   PRI’s The World listener, tipped PRI N this story.

Four dangerous criminals escaped from Maula prison

Four potentially dangerous and violent criminals who were on remand at Maula prison in Lilongwe have on Tuesday escaped after breaking the fence and cell with the help of the outsiders who believe to be their mates in the criminal gang.
Prison break
According to prison source,  the four are linked to bank robberries and murder.



“The incident happened around 4 am in the morning. It is believed that the group was helped by their  fellow  gang members  who came to save them,” said the source.
The names of the four  criminals are James Daudi of Bonongwe village T/A Chimwala in Mangochi, Chonde Saudi of group village Ngwengwe in T/A Kalonga in Salima, Nix Daudi of Bonongwe village in T/A Chimwala, Mangochi all bank robbers and Edward Majawa a murder of Kabudula village in T/A Kabudula in Lilongwe.
The police are therefore appeal for the well-wishers to report having knowledge of the where about of suspects.
The criminals are viewed as potentially dangerous and violent.
However, effort to talk to the prison officials on the matter proved futile.

George Kalukusha in concert, working on new EP

George Kalakusha and his guitar have a soothing and mesmerizing quality that makes one want to keep listening.
George Kalakusha
The Malawian musician who has recently returned from South Africa says he is working on new material some of which will be premiered on Saturday 9 July at Madsoc, an intimate little theatre in Area 2, Lilongwe.



“I would like to invite everyone to come experience the old songs like you’ve never heard them before and new unheard material from my much anticipated forthcoming EP,” he appealed.
Kalukusha has stood on many notable stages and platforms, to mention a few: BBC Introducing, TEDx Lilongwe, Lake of stars festival, Voice of America Radio (USA) and Bloomberg TV (Germany) and this august he will be performing in Scotland at the Edinburgh Fringe Festivals.
He is an artist who sings with an endearing honesty and earnestness that is rare, and refreshing.
Kalukusha has been studying Music performance at the famed African School of Film Studies and Live performance (AFDA) in Cape Town and promises an energetic yet eclectic show.

Home Grown Africa to release new music

Blantyre based Hip Hop duo Home Grown African (Classick and Hayze Engolah) say the group will soon release new music breaking a half year hiatus.



Home Grown African performing on stage
Home Grown African Manager Talumba Chirwa
Reports from Home Grown African (HGA) camp indicate the release could be soon, however no actual dates have been given.
HGA has been silent since they released their critically acclaimed classic EP “Blantyre Blues” last year December. m.malawi-music.com/album.php?id=1
HGA manager Talumba Chirwa confirmed to this publication, saying: “We will be coming out of our half year hiatus soon”.
“We were in studio with Hyze last month actually.  We are working on something. Now we are waiting for Classick to arrive from Lilongwe so he can put his magic on it” explained TC.
It is quite exciting news because Engolah has been awfully quite this year not putting out anything.
Only Classick has stepped up to the mic with “Anaconda” and occasionally dropping verses on features for Sticky Stax and recently Gwamba.
In an earlier unpublished interview around March, we asked Engolah why he was starving fans.
He explained: “I am currently not recording music. But, as soon as am back in the studio. You’ll feel me. I am focusing on different aspects of the industry.”
He added: “Let’s just say my head is somewhere else at the moment. Not in the studio. My focus right now is to get us bankrolled for videos and other projects. Songs I can make any day.”
On a similar note, TC could not be drawn to comment on the videos but hinted we shall be promptly notified when all is ready.

Inside Malawi Land Bill: Law society says approval is legal despite opposition boycott

Opposition parliamentarians on Tuesday morning stormed out of parliament in protest against some clauses in a Land bill but this move proved imprudent as the government easily passed the bill without any challenge.
Empty opposition benches after they all walked out of Parliament
The opposition legislators and the government were at each other’s throat since parliament started sitting at 9:30 am.
The opposition wanted to insert some clauses and sections and remove some clauses.
But the government side, led by Lands, Housing and Urban Development Atupele Muluzi and the government front bench refused to be bulldozed by the opposition MPs.
This led to shouts, heckling, name calling as the House was reduced to a kindergrten school.
In the heat of this, the opposition decided to walk out of the 193 strong House leaving the ruling Democratic Progressive Party and its political bedfellows, the United Democratic Front and independent MPs.
This prompted the government to hurriedly pass the bill with the assistance of Second Deputy Speaker Clement Chiwaya who was chairing the seating.
Law Society of Malawi chairman John Suzi Banda said the passing of the bill in the absence of the opposition was binding.
“We had the same situation some years ago and the opposition went to court but the court said the passing of the bill was legal,” said Banda.
The clauses which the opposition wanted to add and in some cases remove were of no much significance but of significance is the decision by the opposition to abandon their role in parliament.
Leader of the House George Chaponda said the government could not allow that the opposition wanted to force the government amend the law inorder to bring back colonial land law clauses.
Minister of Lands, Muluzi said there is an attempt by government to address the issue of “landlessness” and also to ensure that there is greater access to different groups that would like to own land in this country.
“ We have also attempted in the past to address the issue of providing land to some of our civil servants and we will continue to do that,” said Muluzi.
Serious challenge
Werani Chilenga, the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Joint Committe  which looked at the Land Bill told Parliament that it provides for two categories of land in Malawi – Public Land classified either as government land and private land classified as freehold, leasehold or customary estate.
He said his  committee felt the classification presents a “serious challenge” to current Malawian set up since much land is customary and recommended that a third category; Customary Land be included in the bill.
“Mr Speaker, Sir, the bill also provides that; freehold land acquired by a person who is not a citizen of Malawi prior to the commencement of this Act shall be converted to leasehold interest unless the person currently in possession of such land shall have acquired Malawian citizenship in accordance with the Malawian Citizenship Act within a period of three years of commencement of the Act. The Committee holds the opinion that Freehold Land should not be allocated to any person whether they are Malawians or foreigners. All freehold title holders currently enjoying that status should convert the title to leasehold upon enactment of this bill into law and whereas freehold land will become obsolete,” Chilenga said.
He said members believe that there should be adequate procedures in place to safeguard land in this country in the sole interest of all Malawians.
“We need to institute adequate measures to stop the wanton abuse of buying land by non-Malawian citizens.  We, therefore, recommend that the Minister should be empowered to stop its sale of land in situations where he or she feels Malawians will be put to a disadvantage,” he said.
Chilenga said his committee proposed that the Land Bill should provide for the creation of a National Land Council or Board to take up some of the powers and functions of the Minister and Commissioner, saying Parliament should vet and appoint respective members of the board taking into consideration issues of gender parity.
Retrogressive
Chilenga said the bill provides for monetary compensation for people whose land has been earmarked for investment or national projects.
The Committee, however, pointed out that monetary compensation is “retrogressive” in the long run.
“Often times the little funds people are paid as compensation are prone to abuse and do little to cater for their loss of land for the family. This leaves them destitute and prone to food insecurity for the rest of their lives,” he said.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Parliamentary Committee on Industry, Trade and Tourism should consider making appropriate amendments to the Companies Act with the view of addressing the issue of compensation for the betterment of Malawians.
Mining land



The bill also makes provisions for the designation of land to be used to carry out mining activities of any natural resources in the country.
It does not, however, provide for the rightful provision of proceeds from the business ventures to the inherent owners of the land.
The Committee proposed that a clause to be inserted into the bill to ensure that the owners of the land should have the right to benefit from proceeds of any economic undertaking of the land at a percentage to be determined by the regulations made by the Minister.
Gender
Chilenga said MPs wanted the bill to take into full account of all principles of equality, non-discrimination and affirmative action.
They noted with concern that gender considerations have not been fully spelt out in the creation of all land committees and tribunals at both local and central levels and noted that language used in the bill is not completely gendered.
He said his committee recognised the fact that this bill will change the landscape of the Malawian context and proposed  for the inclusion of a specific clause to ensure that the relevant Minister conducts wide spread civic awareness campaigns on this Act and related laws through traditional leaders and civil society.
In her comment  chairperson of women parliamentary caucus, Jessie Kabwila noted that : Malawians are failing to compete because the playing field on land at the moment is “actually skilled against them.”
“If our land policy actually encourages them and rewards citizenship in terms of ownership and access, the truth of the matter is that most Malawians will own land,” she said.
Dowa East MP Richard Chimwendo Banda (Malawi Congress Party-MCP) said t e way things are, Malawians are failing to compete because the playing field on land at the moment is actually skilled against them.
“Most of them are finding that they cannot compete and they end up not being able to own the land that they are supposed to,” he said.
Section 5(2)(b) of the Customary Land Bill now provides for women representation in the allocation of customary land through creation of customary estate while landlessness, another old concern, is addressed through Section 36 of Customary Land Bill as well which empowers government to redistribute some land to poor people who do not own any.

Kabwila says MCP cadres beat up her supporters

Malawi Congress Party (MCP) spokesperson Jessie Kabwila says the party cadres beat up her supporters at a rally in Salima over the weekend.



Kabwila: Sad 
“I do not want to speak much on the matter I can confirm that my supporters were indeed beaten up,” said Kabwila who is also the party’s shadow cabinet minister for Gender.
MCP president Lazarus Chakwera over the weekend held a political rally in Salima where some senior party officials were chased away.
The party cadres told Kabwila and her colleague Felix Jumbe to leave the podium but they were later allowed to attend.
However some Salima district party officials and a former regional chairman for the centre were chased away from the rally like criminals.
Jumbe in an interview confirmed he was told to leave but did not insisting he could not leave a rally of his party in his home district.
Chakwera confirmed there were problems in the party and was trying to find a lasting political solution.
He said in his life as a cleric and politician, he has faced huge challenges but God has always found solutions for him.
Kabwila and Jumbe now sit at the far back of the MCP bench in parliament from the front row reserved for senior party members.

Lifelines – Between Life and Death promo



Lilongwe to host conference on Combining Spiritual and Academic Excellence

Lilongwe’s long awaited Combining Spiritual and Academic Excellence Conference popularly known as CSAE has been pegged on July 16th at the spectacular Crossroads Hotel, Great Sapitwa Hall.



Pastor Aubrey Mwasinga to be main speaker
Chairperson of the Organizing Committee, Gray Chikanda in a statement said over 2500 participants are expected to attend.
He said: “We are targeting intellectuals, those working, doing business, doing business while doing school, those planning to do school and those in college and university.”
Chikanda said as at now more than 1500 people have registered and the numbers are expected to swell as the day draws nearer.
In a statement, Chikanda said main Speaker at the Conference is Pastor Aubrey Mwasinga, President of Redeemed for a Purpose(RFP) Ministries. He is a holder of a Master of Business Administration and Bachelor of Accountancy degrees, both with distinction. He is also an ACCA Chartered Accountant.
There have been many of such conferences held at different college campuses. Last year’s CSAE conference that took place in September at Robins Park in Blantyre saw the launch of the best seller “Combining Spiritual and Academic Excellence” book whose author is Pastor Mwasinga. The book explains the principles of spiritual and academic success
Chikanda said preparations for the Lilongwe CSAE Conference are at an advanced stage and that they are not leaving anything to chance.
One of the pillars in RFP is Excellence and as the conference denote, participants should expect an event like no other.
In the statement, Chikanda questions: “The question is, are you struggling in your academics? Is failure your lifestyle? Is it Gods will for you to succeed in life? Is getting average results good enough? Get the answers, make it a Must attend.”
 

Lucius Banda irks home fans after failing to perform

Followers of legendary musician Lucius Banda have expressed anger and disappointment with the artist after he failed  to turn up at a show organized over the weekend.
Lucius Banda: No show
Banda was supposed to perform at his Zembani Lodge in Balaka on Friday night together with his Band.
But the impressive patronage which had coughed K2,000 each to patronize the show was left frustrated after ‘Soldier’ as he is popularly known in the music circles was nowhere to be seen.
However, it was the Band leader Sam Simakweli who performed alongside Limbani Dube.



Nepman of the ‘Na Lero’ fame who has been performing with the band was also not present.
Following the development, several people who patronized the show have heavily critisized the artist through various social media platforms.
People who spoke to Nyasa Times also had no kind words for the self proclaimed soldier
of the poor.
“I love ‘Soldier’ and his music but what he did on Friday is uncalled for. That is day light robbery. If he knew he won’t come he couldn’t have been included on the adverts,” said a fan who identified himself as Christopher Sumaili.
Another resident of Andiamo area right in Balaka known as Joe Phiri said Banda acted like a crook.
“This behaviour is bad and an artist of Banda’s calibre is not supposed to act that way. If it was  in other countries, he could have been draged to court” said Phiri.
Another fun seeker who also works as a journalist with one of the well recognised media institution accused Lucious of the same.
“It has become a habit for Lucius and I remember it was again at Zembani during one of my visits where he was suposed to perform but he never showed up. We fun seekers need to be told the truth of who will perform and we decide whether to go or not” said one man.
Banda could not respond when contacted  through a messenger  Whtasapp.

MCP welcomes tycoon Mwanyongo: ‘Karonga will no longer be misled by DPP’

The opposition Malawi Congress Party (MCP) has said its strengthening and that people of Karonga will no longer be misled by the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP).
Nkhoma in MCP uniform speaking during the meeting
Mwanyongo welcomed by Nkhoma
A group of women dancing.
The remarks were made during the welcoming ceremony of the renowned business tycoon and agriculturalist Daniel Chitonya Mwanyongo as the party’s shadow Member of Parliament (MP) at Karonga North West.
Speaking during the function, the MCP District Chairperson Emmanuel Nkhoma said the joining of Mwanyongo in the party symbolize that MCP is rejuvenating and becoming strong.
“It is difficult in Malawi’s political history to see  credible people joining and hundreds of people attending opposition party meetings  especially when organized at district level,” said Nkhoma.
Nkhoma related the development as the major sign that his party is liked by Malawians and that it is the only vehicle to take the country away from the economic turmoil.
“Recently  we welcomed renowned people like Dr Cornelius Mwalwanda (former deputy minister of Finance), the academician Dr Bellings Sikanda among others,” he added.



“Karonga now is the home of MCP and no go zone area for other parties,” Nkhoma disclosed.
In his remarks, Mwanyongo who is the owner of Inter-Line Bus Company as well as the former civil servant said:“I decide to join the party after noticing that it has the ability to save Malawian from hunger and economic crisis.”
“Apart from that, being the citizen of Karonga I am very concern with the failure of elected leaders to develop the North West constituency despite being the center or town of the district,” he added.

MP says govt sold Lake Malawi to Mota Engil

Malawi Parliament was nearly thrown in turmoil on Monday afternoon after Mzimba West MP Harry Mkandawire claimed the government has sold Lake Malawi to Mota Engil, a Portuguese construction company with close links to the President Peter Mutharika family.



Mkandawire: Triggered the matter
Mkandawire said he had evidence to show that the government of Malawi had given a 40 year concession to run the affairs of Lake Malawi.
The legislators were debating on a Land bill.
Cabinet ministers, including Leader of the House George Chaponda, Chief whip Henry Mussa and Information minister Patricia Kaliati were on their feet, refuting the allegations as unfounded and baseless.
A report which Mkandawire presented to the House recently showed that former president Bingu wa Mutharika had a cut of 10 per cent as commission on the company’s lucrative government contracts, a claim denied by the government of Peter Mutharika, brother to the late president.
However,  the determined but soft spoken Mkandawire, said he had all the documentation and evidence to prove his point to which Speaker Richard Msowoya asked him to bring all the evidence on Tuesday.
However, opposition members of parliament, who included Zomba Changalume MP John Chikalimba and Dedza east MP Juliana Lunguzi wondered why the senior cabinet ministers were fast to defend Mota Engil when the parliamentarians also attacked Crown for taking a chunk of land along the M1 Road between Zalewa and Chingeni turn offs.
There was total silence from the government side.
The legislators said it was sad that most of productive land is in the hands of Asians and Burundians among others who corruptly acquire it from corrupt officials from the Lands ministry.
Mota Engil made separate cheque payments to the late president wa Mutharika personal accounts at some commercial banks from as low as K1 million (about $4 000) to as high as K10 million (about $40 000) at a time.
Among others, Mota-Engil made the cheque deposits into the late president’s personal bank account number 0140001886701 at Capital City Branch of Standard Bank.
One cheque worth K10 million was deposited into Mutharika’s Standard Bank account number 0140001886701 on March 3 2010.
On the deposit slip, the depositor only identified himself as Mota-Engil, but the signature is the same as the one on an FMB cheque number 9480 belonging to Mota-Engil.  The other signature on the three cheques is for managing director Antonmarco Zorzi.
The other two cheques are numbered 12570 (worth K2.5 million) and 12571 (worth K1 million). These cheques were written on March 24 2011.
The other two cheques are numbered 12570 (worth K2.5 million) and 12571 (worth K1 million). These cheques were written on March 24 2011.
 

MPICO lease agreement with Malawi govt expires: Profits down fromK1.5bn to K0.78bn

Malawi Stock Exchange listed firm Malawi Property Investment Company (MPICO) has reported a sharp decrease in profit after tax from MK1.45 billion in 2014 to MK776 million last year.



Du Plessis responding to a question
Jiya stressing a point during the AGM
Mawindo (5th from left) pose with fellow directors at Blue Ginger
The disclosure was made by MPICO acting board chairperson Edith Jiya during the company’s Annual General Meeting (AGM) held at MPICO Gateway Mall Conference Hall in Lilongwe last week.
Jiya, who presented the chairman’s statement following the retirement of former board chairman Dye Mawindo largely attributed the sharp decrease to interest borrowings on the MPICO Gateway Mall, which came operational this year.
According to financial statements presented to members during the AGM, MPICO obtained loans from FDH Bank, National Bank of Malawi and other international financial institutions to finance construction of the country’s biggest shopping mall.
The company’s debts presently stand at MK12 billion but Jiya said the company had put in place some measures to retire the debts including issuance of more shares. It is also expected that rental fees from the mall will significantly contribute to settling of the loans.
Despite the sharp decrease in profits, the company’s total income increased from MK4.5 billion to MK6 billion, representing a 35 percent increase.
The increase was attributed to the growth in rental income of 45 percent and growth in fair value adjustment of 32 percent.
However, it was highlighted in the chairman’s statement that rental collections from government, which reportedly owes the firm about MK3 billion remained a challenge.
Apparently, the five-year lease agreement between MPICO and the government expired on June 30, 2016 and several government Ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) have been relocating to new premises.
Explaining the development in an interview, Jiya said MPICO was discussing with the government to rationalise the rental situation.
“We are operating in tough economic situations and most of our tenants, including government, which has been renting most of our facilities have been affected. When our tenants are facing problems, we are affected too.
“That is why we have engaged in mutual discussions with the government to see how best to handle the rental issue after the expiry of the agreement,” said Jiya, who insisted that MPICO was not chasing government from its buildings.
Mawindo bids farewell
Later in the evening, MPICO directors and top management gathered at Blue Ginger Restaurant in Lilongwe’s Area 10 when the company hosted a farewell dinner for its former Chairman Dye Mawindo.
Mawindo resigned from the MPICO board a couple of months ago after picking up a job as Chief executive officer for Millennium Challenge Account Malawi.
Speaking in an interview after the farewell dinner, Mawindo said he was leaving a happy man after improving the status of the company.
“When I came back five years ago, one of the challenges we had was to diversity the company’s portfolio and make sure we are present in other sectors. That was the reason we embarked on the Gateway Mall project, which was not an easy challenge.
“I am happy that dream has been fulfilled although there are still some gaps, which others will have to fulfil,” said Mawindo.
This is the second time for Mawindo to step down from the board after heading the board between 1987 to 1995 when he was general manager for the defunct Malawi Development Corporation (MDC), which then had the majority of shares in MPICO. He voluntarily resigned from the board when MDC ceased its operations.
MPICO Managing director Peter du Plessis said the company’s management would miss the services of Mawindo, who he said had greatly contributed to the company’s growth.
“Since I came three years ago, we have had a very good relationship with him and he has greatly contributed to the growth of business. He has been giving us good direction and I have learnt a lot from him,” said du Plessis, who singled out the Gateway Mall as one of the company’s major achievements during Mawindo’s reign.

MPs demand 7 Malawi ministers implicated in K577bn cashgate to resign

Opposition members of parliament on Tuesday asked for Palriament to  discuss K577 billion (about $856 million) financial analysis report in the wake of revelations that seven Cabinet ministers were allegedly involved in the mismanagement of the public funds.



7 ministers implicated in the K577 report are in parliament
Hary Mkandawire MP: Matter of public importance
The National Audit Office (NAO) has submitted 13 files related to the pilferage of public fund  between 2009 and December 31 2014 following  the report prepared  after  the findings by the business advisory firm PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) titled Financial Analysis Report: Reconstruction of the Malawi Government Cashbook for Purposes of Further Investigation.
Firebrand politican, Rumphi East MP Kamlepo Kalua (People’s Party-PP) wanted the House to waive all business planned for the day to deliberate on the Cashgate report which has implicated ministers sitting on the government front bench.
Kalua also suggested that the suspected seven Cabinet ministers should be thrown  of Parliament and only be allowed back after being cleared of any wrong doing.
Mzimba West MP Harry Mkandawire (PP) echoed Kalua’s sentiments that the matter is already in public domain after Malawi News and Nyasa Times reported on Saturday, saying  the ministers if they have any integrity – as one of the three pillars of national development – should no longer hold their positions.
“These Cabinet ministers know themselves and if they have a shred of honour, they should have resigned until investigations on the matter are over,” up-front talking Mkandawire said.
He said the  matter is of public importance .
But the Speaker of Parliament Richard Msowoya  said it was a “preliminary report “ which could not be tabled.
Msowoya gagged MPs, saying “ we cannot believe what the newspapers write” threatening to throw out  any member commenting on the DPP cashgate.
In a June 19 2015, NAO said the  audit analysis had identified significant discrepancies between payments made from government bank accounts and cashbook records held in the Integrated Financial Management and Information System (Ifmis), the government’s electronic payment system.
Revelations of the K577 billion cashgate came hot on the heels of a forensic audit report by British firm, RSM (formely called Baker Tilly), that established that K24 billion was looted from Capital Hill between April and September 2013 under the administration of Joyce Banda and her People’s Party (PP).
Banda is on record saying “ There must be a stubborn link between the MK577 billion scandal of 2009 and 2012 and the MK20 billion cashgate of 2013.”
The K577 billion cashgate audit report will be a stern test to President Peter Mutharika committement to fight corruption without fear or favour.
Corruption in Malawi is severe, well-known, cuts across many sectors, and is frequently debated and discussed in the media.
Such corruption undermines human rights in multiple ways: a direct defiance of the rule of law and accountability. By unlawfully interfering with resources that should be available to realize fundamental rights such as the rights to health, water, food, and education—either through illegally appropriating public funds for personal wealth or rendering access to services subject to bribes, which are illegal—corruption leads to violations of human rights that may have disastrous consequences.
Observers also note that lack of political will has crippled Malawi’s anti-corruption  bureau, undermining their efforts through political interference and threats.
Given Malawi’s political patronage system, it is highly unlikely that President Mutharika will put his trusted ministers in the dock .
 

Madonna meets President Mutharika, vows support for more Malawi projects

American pop star Mdonna on Monday met President Peter Mutharika at Kamuzu Palace in Lilongwe a day after she inspected construction works for a miultimillion dollar, two storey magnifiscent and the first ever padriatric ward and intensive care unit which she is funding   at Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital in Blantyre.
Mutharika in a meeting with Madonna – Photo courtesy of Malawi State House
Photo opportunity: Malawi President Mutharika with Madonna- Photo courtesy of Malawi State House
Presidential Press Secretary Mgeme Kalirani said in a statement made available to Nyasa Times that Mutharika and Madonna had a myriad of issues  to discuss in her capacity as Goodwill Ambassador for Child Welfare in Malawi.
Among the issues discussed, according to Kalilani, among the issues discussed included projects the singer is funding in Malawi through her Rising Malawi.
Madonna’s foundation, Raising Malawi, is constructing the 50-bed children ward .
The Presidential spokesman said Madonna “informed” the Malawi leader that construction works for the project are “almost complete and that she will now be moving to the second phase of the project which is procurement of equipment and furnishing of the clinic.”
The pop diva further informed the President that the hospital shall offer “free services”  with a small section for paying patients, said Kalilani.
The State House statement said President Mutharika hailed Madonna for the progress made on the project and assured the pop diva of his government’s committed to supporting her initiatives.
“The President believes the project shall have an enormous impact on government programmes aimed at saving lives of children in the country as well as on improving health delivery services in general,” reads the statement.
The children’s unit is a 50-bed ward and will enable the hospital to increase the number of surgeries for children at the hospital by almost 100%.
Once operational in early 2017, the clinic will be the first Intensive Care Unit for pediatric surgery in Malawi.



Madonna was meeting President Mutharika for the second time having first met in November 2014  when Mutharika appointed her as Malawi’s Ambassador for Child Welfare.
Prior to Mutharika’s ascendance to power, Madonna had a stormy relationship with Malawi’s ex-president Joyce Banda who stripped the pop star’s VIP status.
Banda accused Madonna of being bad-mannered and of pressing everlasting gratitude from Malawians simply because she adopted two children.
Madonna adopted two Malawian children namely Mercy James and David James who joined her during her visit to Malawi.

Mafco’s Richard Mbulu tops goalscoring chart: Malawi TNM Super League

Mafco’s Richard Mbulu scored two goals when his team beat rookies Karonga United 5-0 to add his tally of goals to eight and become the leading scorer in the 2016 TNM Super League season.
Richard Mbulu golden boot chaser
The win also put Mafco at third place with 22 points from12 games, just three points short of leaders Blue Eagles, who have 25 points from 11 games. Silver Strikers are second with 23 points from 11 games.
A total of 222 goals have been scored from 95 matches played with Mbulu at eight and Manasseh Chiyesa (Kamuzu Barracks) and Anthony Banda (Epac FC) tying at seven.



At six goals there is Kuda Muyaba (Moyale), Peter Wadabwa (Mighty Be Forward Wanderers) and Chiukepo Msowoya (Nyasa Big Bullets).
With four goals are Gilbert Chirwa, Maxwell Salambula (both for Blue Eagles), Moses Nankumba (Red Lions), Harvey Mkacha (Kamuzu Barracks), Yamikani Chester, Bright Munthali (Azam Tigers), Nelson Kangunje (Civo United), Lughindiko Mushani (Mzuni FC), Binwell Katinji (Silver Strikers) and Gastin Simkonda (Moyale).
So far, four players have scored hat-tricks — Mighty Be Forward Wanderers striker Peter Wadabwa, Anthony Banda of (Epac FC), Gastin Simkonda (Moyale) and Maxwell Salambula (Blue Eagles).
Kamuzu Barracks lead with most goals scored at 25). Nyasa Big Bullets can take pride to be the one with strongest defence as they just conceeded seven goals from 10 matches.
Rookies MTV Max Bullets have found the going tough and remain winless after playing 12 matches while Karonga United have let in the most goals at 23 and managing to score only four goals from 12 matches.
Meanwhile, Gilbert Chirwa of Blue Eagles was player of the month of April while Lughindiko Mushani of Mzuni FC was for May.
The following is how they stand:
P   W  D  L  GF Pts
1. Blue Eagles         11 8 1 2 20 12 25
2. Silver strikers     11 7 2 2 17   8  23
3. Mafco                  12 6 4 2 22 13  22
4. K. Barracks        14 6 4 4 25 17  22
5. Moyale                 13 6 3 4 22 16  21
6. Azam Tigers      13 5 5 3 13    8 20
7. Mzuni                   12 6 2 4 11    9 20
8. Epac                     13 6 1 6 15 14 19
9. Wanderers          10 4 5 1 15 10 17
10. Nyasa BB          10 4 4 2 12   7 16
11. Civo Utd             13 4 3 6 10 17 15
12. Red Lions         12 4 1 7 12  17 13
13. Wizards             11 3 3 5  7   10 12
14. Dwangwa         11 1 3 7  8   19 6
15. Karonga Utd    12 1 3 8  4   23 6
16. Max Bullets     12  0 4 8  9   22 4

Malawi Achievers Awards –SA: Actor Eugine Khumbanyiwa, Maduka, Prophet Bushiri, singer Gemini Major among winners

It was joy all over Scarlet Ribbon, a venue in Edenvale, Johannesburg where Malawi Achievers Awards – SA (South Africa) edition took place to  recognise and celebrate  achievement and success of people in different fields.



Recepients of Malawi Achievers Awards -SA
Recepients of Malawi Achievers Awards -SA
Hosted by Dennis ‘SoFavoured’ Imaan and Spotless, the event awarded Malawians staying in South Africa for their various contributions.
Awards of the night were Best Contribution in Humanitarian Aid, in and outside Malawi awarded to Prophet Shepherd Bushiri, Best contribution in entertainment awarded to Malawi actor Eugine Khumbanyiwa and Best contribution in Human Rights awarded to Ben Chiza Mkandiwire.
Other special awards went to Gemini Major (Rising Star), Connie Chiume (Woman of Substance), Wezi Chipeta (Business), Salad Nthenda (Tourism), Francis Muleso (Social Welfare), Dr. Mark Winter (Academic), Eric Palian (Music Promotion) and John Maduka (Sports).
The event was spiced up by performances from  rapper Tay Grin, Gemini Major, Fredokiss, Buffalo Souljah, DJ Waxxy, Janta, Nesnes and Don Zaggah.
Speaking on the sidelines, Eugine Khumbanyiwa thanked organizers of the event and Malawi at large for the special recognition which came timely into his career life.
Gemini Major also explained that he was honored to get his special award and he was over excited that it came from Malawi.
Receiving the Award on behalf of Major 1, Kelvin Sulugwe, the Public Relations Officer for Prophet Shepherd Bushiri said the man of God could not make it as he is in prayer, undergoing his 90 days fasting.
He however thanked Mbiri Events and all Malawians for the special recognition to Major 1.
Malawi Achievers Awards SA organizers promised to make this an annual awards where more Malawians will gather together and recognize home contributions.

Malawi MPs tamper with Airtel network: Social football and netball


Football: MPs 4 Airtel 3 
Netball : MPs 17 Airtel 2

Parliamentarian football and netball teams tampered with Airtel network, when they defeated Airtel football and netball teams in social friendly games played at Silver Stadium on Friday, July 8, 2016.
Chakani eludes a defender for the MPs team
The MPs side during pep-talk
Deadly duo- Kamoto, Mtumbuka go for recess
Chima makes a basket
Minister of Sports Chiumia captured in action
Trouble started for the mobile network specialists on the Silver netball court, where the MPs netball side led by Sports and Culture Minister Grace ‘Obama’ Chiumia loaded it over a youthful Airtel side, which only managed two baskets against 17 for the female Backbenchers.
The absence of Centre Patricia ‘Akweni’ Kaliati, Goal Defender Jessie Kabwira Kapasula, Wing Defender Esther Mcheka Chilenje, Goal Shooter Juliana Lunguzi and Goalkeeper Jean Kalilani was not even felt for the legislators as Shadow MP Kester Chima netted basket after basket with Chiumia dominating the centre.
Airtel captain Chifundo Kumpukwe admitted her side was simply not up to the occasion: “We accept the defeat. We have paid for the price of poor preparations but next time we will prepare for them and take revenge,” said Kumpukwe, who netted one of the baskets for Airtel.
Chiumia attributed the victory to team spirit and hard work amongst the Parliamentarians: “We trained for three days and there was good coordination amongst us. We are the Queens number two and all our opponents better watch out,” said Chiumia.
Onto the soccer pitch, Airtel men looked set to avenge their women’s defeat as they led the MPs 3-1 at half-time courtesy of goals from former Blue Eagles striker Feston Chakani, Nyengo Thaulo and Dr Mathews Mtumbuka. Honourable Comodious Nyirenda scored the lone first half strike for the legislators.
Came second half, the Parliamentarians piled huge pressure on the opponents, forcing one of Airtel defenders Menard Phiri to stab the ball into his own net.
Honourable Sam Kawale levelled for the MPs midway into the second half with a 35-metre cracking shot before Shadow MP Chikondi Chisale sealed victory for the legislators in the dying minutes.
Shortly after the goal, the MPs started calling for an adjournment of the game to attend to the morning business of Parliament and Fifa female referee Charity Ndozi obliged by blowing the final whistle.
Former University Football Club (UFC) winger Charles Kamoto, who captained the Airtel side was lost for words after the whistle only congratulating the MPs.



Speaking in his capacity as Airtel Managing Director, Kamoto said they organised the friendly match to interact with the MPs and listen to their constituents’ needs as regards to the services offered by Airtel.
Team manager for the MPs’ side Allan Ngumuya, who did not feature due to injury said his side struggled in the first half due to the absence of several key players but improved in the second half after making some tactical changes.
Amongst the players that were missing on the MPs line up were right back Richard Msowoya, attacking midfielder Dr Lazarus Chakwera, winger George Chaponda, nimble footed Atupele Muluzi and left back Uladi ‘Change Golo’ Mussa.
 

Malawi Parliament on marathon race to pass bills

Speaker of the National Assembly Richard Msowoya has said members of parliament will on Wednesday meet from morning not in the afternoon as is tradition on Mondays and Wednesdays.
Speaker Richard Msowoya: Race against time
He said the Business Committee, the political leadership of the House agreed to waive the Standing Orders so that the House meets from morning to finish all business parliament lined up for this meeting.



Parliament is expected to rise on Friday after a week long extension.
In addition, he said, Thursday will be government business day not private members day as is the tradition.
He said this will enable the government dispose off all remaining business.
Leader of the House George Chaponda said there are many bills which need to be tackled before parliament rises which include the Access to Information bill and several land bills among others.
The one week extension of parliament has cost the government unbudgetted K67.5 million in allowances for the 193 legislators who get a whopping K50000 per day each in addition to the K1.5 million basic salary.

Malawi developing legislative scheme to save ex-convicts

The Malawi Law Commission is in the process of developing legislation that will save ex-convicts from stigmatization in different ways.
Judge Charles Mkandawire: Erasing criminal history
Special Law commission on the development of legislation on spent convictions has started holding consultative meetings regarding the matter. Currently Malawi does not have a legislative scheme that deals with spent convictions.
The rationale for spent conviction schemes is to give effect to the principle that persons who have been convicted of offences should not necessarily have to suffer the consequences for the rest of their lives.



Speaking during a Southern Region Consultative meeting held in Blantyre on Monday, chairperson of the Special Law Commission on the development of legislation on spent convictions, Justice Charles Mkandawire said the law is aimed at erasing the criminal history of a convict thereby removing the effect of a criminal record on the convict.
“A spent conviction generally means an expired conviction. It is a conviction without effect and any detrimental effect on the offender. Criminal record and in particular a conviction continues to haunt the person that was convicted for the rest of his or her life.
“Thus despite serving a sentence to its fullest and lawful extent, conviction records continue to punish a person by stigmatizing him or her in relation to reintegration and incorporation into society.
“With these an ex-convict therefore struggles to get employment, meaningfully engage with society or enjoy meaningful participation in the social, economic and political opportunities that life has to offer,” said Justice Mkandawire.
Justice Mkandawire said the spent convictions scheme aims to address this predicament and completion of sentence.
According to Justice Mkandawire the development of the legislation falls under criminal Justice reform which will benefit all Malawians.
The consultations of the legislation are expected to end early 2017. And the findings of the meetings will be forwarded to the Ministry of Justice to map the way forward.

Malawi down the slope of decline: Risky measures needed to addess BOP difficualties

In his intercession prayer, reverend Maurice Munthali of the Livingstonia Synod of the CCAP said Malawians must embrace a culture of hard work; desist from envy; and asked the God to endow Malawi with all blessings of prosperity and success.



On July 6 of every year, since 1964, Malawians have commemorated the ‘Independence Day’. The day has always been characterized by a national day of events replete with dances, military displays, football and netball matches, speeches and many more.
This year, government had directed that the day would not be accompanied by the usual pomp. Instead, a National Prayer Service would be all that would happen. This, according to the government of President Peter Mutharika, was meant to be an austerity decision in the face of deepening economic crisis. Extremely logical!
So, there we were, at Bingu International Conference Centre (BICC) on July 6, 2016, attending a National Prayer of Service in commemoration of the day we gained political independence from our former colonialists, the British. It was a colourful event by any measure. The gathering signified the unity of purpose that we, Malawians, enjoy. Malawi Congress Party (MCP) President Dr. Lazarus Chakwera was there; Sheikh Dinala Chabulika of the Muslim Association of Malawi and many other clergymen were there, too.
But some of us think that there is still more to be done than just prayers if our independence is to become meaningful.
While celebrating the 52nd anniversary of our Independence, we needed to take stock of our performance as a people in selected sectors of our country’s development endeavour. As a people, we must put emphasis on mutual understanding, appreciate differences, and tolerate diversity in the multi-cultural environment we live in.
President Mutharika, sorry to say, failed to demonstrate in his speech during the ceremony, what measures we have in place, as a nation, to achieve a society free of poverty and underdevelopment. Regardless of the achievements that we celebrate, millions of our people are nowhere near being liberated from the scourges of poverty and lack.
Mr. President, fellow Malawians, we need an ‘independent’ Malawi that is able to produce sufficient food to meet its own requirements. We need Malawi where its inhabitants have money to buy water, electricity, food and relish.
 
Despite celebrating 52 years of independence, it is an open secret that the Mutharika administration has veered off the course in implementing economic and political reforms. This has led Malawi down the slope of decline.
President Mutharika must implement bold and politically risky measures to address Malawi’s balance of payment difficulties and secure the free-falling economy. He must mend fences with friends and partners of Malawi and restore democratic governance, rule of law and respect of human rights.
The President and his administration must focus on eradicating poverty through economic growth and wealth creation.
To celebrate our independence in real terms, our rulers must transform the structure of the economy, promote the private sector in order to achieve high economic growth, escalate job creation and protect the vulnerable and excluded within a decentralized and democratic environment.
Government must ensure farmers’ access to improved seeds, technologies and irrigation; engagement of a new crop of entrepreneurial leaders that are dedicated to the improvement of agriculture; building new value addition industries for agro-processing; undertaking business climate reform and attracting investment into tourism and mining sectors.
To all Malawians, let us become actors in the unfolding effort of eradicating the painful legacy of poverty, conflict and economic stagnation. 52 years of independence shall still be meaningless if millions of Malawians remain nowhere near being liberated from the scourge of poverty.
We must act with the urgency to give meaning to the country’s liberation by freeing the majority of the population from the colonization of poverty. As Reverend Maurice Munthali and others preached, Malawians need to consolidate this hard-won freedom and realize our vision of attaining a better life for all.
Too many people are still poor. There are too many people without jobs. There are too many people without houses. There are still too many children who study under a tree. Many of our mothers are stilldying while giving birth.
There are also other problems we must confront together as they impact negatively on the standard of living of the people. We must act according to the call of unity of purpose to deal with these challenges. We must work together across the divide of politics for the good our nation.
It is a matter of urgency; Malawi must now be a united, just and democratic society, marked by economic recovery and eradication of poverty. Government must accelerate people’s access, especially the poor, to adequate housing, health care, education, water and sanitation and electricity, among others.
We, as a nation, cannot achieve this if our rulers say one thing today and do another tomorrow. You cannot be saying of austerity measures today and fly out to Ethiopia tomorrow to receive an insignificant Doctorate Degree at the expense of the taxpayer.  Our President is already a professor. It doesn’t just add up!
“Overcoming poverty is not a task of charity, it is an act of justice. Like Slavery and Apartheid, poverty is not natural. It is man-made and it can be overcome and eradicated by the actions of human beings. “ – Nelson Mandela.

Malawi dual citizenship, President orders Justice Minister to draft  legislation

President Peter Mutharika has said he has ordered his Justice minister Samuel Tembenu to draft a dual citizenship legislation to allow Malawians stuck in diaspora come back home and invest.
President Peter Mutharika : Malawi dual citizenship on the cards
Mutharika told the state controlled Malawi Broadcasting Corporation that the ministry of Justice is currently working on the legislation which will enable Malawians hold dual citizenship.
The President said he will live to his promise he made in parliament romise that government will review dual citizenship law.
“We are currently drafting the legislation, very soon we will have the legislation. This will be possible because we want Malawians in diaspora to come to Malawi,” he said.
On the country’s economy, Mutharika said although the kwacha has stabilised, the inflation and high interest rates remain high.
“We are working on these,” said Mutharika.
He could however not give a difinite answer as to when exactly the economy is expected to be back on his feet.
However he said the government is is luring more investors as way of giving dosage to the sick economy so that it can recover.
“There is no way the economy can improve without investment. I can assure Malawians that we are putting thge structures in place to put the economy back,” he said.
Some sections of the society have blamed the president for chartering a presidential jet when the economy is on sick bed and most ordinary Malawians do not know when they will get their next meal and public hospitals continue to turn back sick people due to lack of drugs.
Mutharika recently chartered a South African plane to Ethiopia where he received a doctorate. Mustafa Hussein, lecturer at University of Malawi’s Chancellor College, described the president’s actions as regrettable.



Due to the ailing state of Malawi’s economy, Mutharika has been forced to utilise passenger planes in recent times, with his bag having gone missing during one of his international trips.
The President’s comments also come at a time when electricity and water continue to be a night mare.
 
 
 

Malawi govt delays contributory pension scheme for civil servants

Government says it has delayed the mandatory contribitory pension scheme for civil servants because of lack of resources.



Public workers: A calling to serve not to suffer
Spokesperson for Finance ministry Nations Msowoya said the government needs K380 billion as a starter up fund to kick start the scheme.
“After the K380 billion, the government will be pumping in K50 billion annually,” said Msowoya.
He said the government intends to roll out the scheme in phases starting with those less than two years and below.
Msowoya said implementing the scheme in phases will ensure efficiency of the scheme.
Currently the government funds 100 per cent of the civil servants pension fund.

Malawi in forensic audit exercise in city, district councils: Kasungul CEO Stewart Ngoka on forced leave

Government says it has sent auditors to all city and district councils before releasing this year’s funding allocation.



Nankhumwa: Audit in councils
Finance minister Goodall Gondwe said councils which misappropriated last year’s funds will not get the allocation unless every penny is accounted for.
“We will prosecute all officers who embezzled the money,” said Gondwe.
Parliament approved huge sums of money for the district and city councils meant for grass root development.
Local government minister Kondwani Nankhumwa said the government would enforce all laws which protect public money.
In addition, he said there will be training for controlling officers of some councils to ensure that public money is protected.
Forced out
Meanwhile, Kasungu Town Council chief executive officer Stewart Ngoka has been forced to go on leave to pave way for government investigations following accusations of maladministration.
Workers downed tools demanding his removal after they had not been paid for three months.
Some councillors also accused the CEO of level headedness.
“He makes decisions without consulting anyone, this is why the workers have not been paid all that long,” said one of the councillors.
Mayor for the Municipality Irene Katola confirmed Ngoka is on forced leave.
“We will employ a temporary CEO as the government is making its decision on the matter,” she said.
She said a meeting of officals from the Local government ministry and councillors resolved to send Ngoka on forced leave.
In Chikhwawa, health workers have downed tools to force a chief accountant out of office. They are accusing him of disrespect to junior workers.

Malawi minister cautions MPs over remarks on foreigners grabbing land

Lands minister Atupele Muluzi has cautioned legislators to comment with sensitivity that foreigners were grabbing land with the aid corrupt government officials.
Atupele Muluzi: Insensitive remarks against foreignors on land grab is unacceptable
Muluzi said this on Monday afternoon during a heated debate  in Parliament on Land Bill as the legislators said foreigners have large chunks of land when owners of the land, Malawians, are landless.
“We need to move with caution on this issue. This is a very sensitive issue. We need to balance this issue with our quest to have investors. Some of the land owned by foreigners are for investment purposes,” said Muluzi.
Salima east MP Jessie Kabwila said women and children will remain at the bottom if they are always at the mercy of men.
“Malawi will never develop if women are sidelined on land issues. The social economic challenges will never end if women are always put at the bottom on land issues,” she said.



Dowa east MP Richard Chimwendo Banda said land prices in Malawi are extremely expensive for the reach of most ordinary Malawians including civil servants and asked the government to have deliberate policies to enable civil servants own land.
 

Malawi population at 17.6 million ‘scary’: Mark population day in muted style

Malawi on Monday silently commemorated the World Population Day as population boom continues to negatively affect social services.
Malawi is one of the poorest countries in the world: 65 percent of the population here lives on less than 1.25 dollars a day, and nearly one in 10 children die before their fifth birthday. Credit: Claire Ngozo/IPS
Population expert Dr Collins Kalua said there was need to sensitize the youth, who are the bulk of the population in Malawi, to delay marriages as way of slowing the population growth.
“The best way to delay the marriages of the youth is to keep them in school for long but the problem is that we have very few places in public colleges. We can keep them in primary and secondary schools but they might not find space in colleges,” said Kalua.
He however said there was need to sensitize the youth on the disadvantages of early marriages.
Dedza east MP Juliana Lunguzi said if left unchecked, Malawi will continue to have inadequate resources for its people like for health, education and other social services will not be adequate.
Malawi population currently stands at 17.6  million, data from National Statistical Office (NSO) indicates.



According to NSO, Malawi has now over male 8 730 731 males and females 8 932 889 respectively.
Information minister Patricia Kaliati said the government will continue doing civic education to its people on the evils of over population.
Kaliati said the high rate of population growth, particularly is a matter of “serious concern” as it is having an adverse impact on the available national resources.
“We talk about rising costs of essential commodities, inflation… all these are a direct result of increasing population,” she noted.
Finance Minister Goodall Gondwe has said new population figure  is scary and calls for intensified family planning.
“We have more people to feed and income per capita is expected to be reduced,” Gondwe said.
According to  Economics Association of Malawi (Ecama) president Henry Kachaje said the rise in population is of great concern because it puts  more stress on natural and financial resources.
A population expert said the population rate has drastically dropped from six per cent 20 years ago to 4.4 per cent.
According to the latest World Bank report, total population in Malawi was last recorded at 16.8 million people in 2014, from 3.5 million in 1960, representing a 377 percent increase in 50 years.
The Malawi population is projected to be over 30 million by 2040.
 

Malawi to launch web-based trade portal

Minister of Industry, Trade and Tourism Joseph Mwanamvekha will on Thursday officially launch the Malawi Trade Portal at Sunbird Mount Soche Hotel in Blantyre.
Cliff Chiunda-The portal will reduce time spent to get proper documentation
The Trade Portal, which is a one-stop website for trade-related regulatory information for import, export and transit trade, complements World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement on Trade Facilitation, to which Malawi is a signatory, which obliges governments to be transparent and facilitate information to businesses.
In a statement released by the Principal Secretary for Industry, Trade and Tourism Cliff Chiunda on Tuesday, the Trade Portal is part of Government’s initiative to turn Malawi into a producing and exporting country.



Chiunda said that Government has embarked on a drive to facilitate trade and investment and that the development and launch of the Trade Portal is aimed at providing easy access to trade-related regulatory information to traders and businesses in a bid to enhance transparency and accountability.
According to the statement, information that can be found on the Portal includes: all commercial laws and regulations governing import, export and transit of commercial goods, procedures and requirements for processing licenses and various permits, and the samples of these application forms that can be downloaded.
“The portal will inform traders on the legal requirements to be met as they import or export your goods. It will also alert traders about the duties, and other fees, or exemptions that are applicable.
“The portal also contains information on which goods are prohibited, restricted, and other non-tariff measures; the entire catalogue of applicable tariffs linked to commodity classification is also available,” reads the statement in part.
The portal will help reduce the time traders spend to get proper documentation to do trade, resulting in improved ease of doing business due to reduced trading time and cost.
The trade portal which has been developed with financial and technical assistance from the World Bank Group is expected to help improve Malawi’s rankings in World Bank’s Doing Business Index and the Global Competitiveness Index.
A short video documentary on the Malawi Trade Portal is available on YouTube through this link: https://youtu.be/ITqEs20vM2U  or by simply searching: “Malawi Trade Portal 2016” on YouTube.

Malawi workers union pushes for K40 000 minimum wage

Malawi Congress of Trade Unions (MCTU) has asked the government to raise minimum wage to K40000 from K20000 due to escalating cost of living.
Workers need good pay
MCTU secretary general Pontiphar Kalichero said the union will soon be meeting government officials to discuss the matter.
“Statistics show that the cost of living is at K80000 to K100000 depending on which city and area one is,” said Kalichero
. Malawi is undergoing severe economic problems  following the  abrupt withdrawal of aid three years ago due to the plunder of public money at Capital Hill and severe weather patterns which led to flooding and drought among other factors.
Labour minister Henry Mussa said the government cannot push the minimum wage up because even companies have been hit hard by the economic spiral.
“If we raise the minimum wage, then two things might happen, either the companies will close down or the companies will make redundancies  which is not good,” he said.



He said the government do not want more closures of companies or redundancies as this will shake up further the dwindling economy.
Inflation and interest rates are high up forcing companies to down size their operations.

Malawi, a future betrayed

We are having a telephone conversation when, suddenly, one of us is thrown into darkness. Lights out. It is an interruption that rearranges both conversation and life itself. Indeed, for most Malawians, life revolves around the availability of basic services such as water and electricity. These days, both are scarce. The bills, however, increase every month without sufficient justification from relevant authorities.
A young man sells jerry cans at Limbe Market in Blantyre. He is one of the many young job seekers who are increasingly pushed into the informal sector in a desperate bid to survive in a tough economic climate. Photo: Thoko Chikondi
A lady sells groundnuts as an entrepreneurial means to support her familly. -Photo: Thoko Chikondi
Children scavenge for maize floor at a maize mill in the hunger stricken southern district of Chikwawa. Photo: Thoko Chikondi
If you dare question these bills, as you are entitled to do as a consumer, you are likely to be met with scorn, if not ridicule. This is a culture that permeates the public service in Malawi, a segment of society that feels it is doing you a favour when serving you. This culture is probably state-sanctioned, for how else can you explain a government that allows those in the public service to act in the way they do?
Anyway, the conversation has to end. Bedtime. It is impossible to tell when the electricity will come back on, so from this moment on it is important to conserve as much battery power on the phone as possible to remain connected to the outside world. Contact with the rest of the world is one of the few things that keep you sane in the midst of all this insanity around you.
Donors, dictators and disenfranchisement
The food cooking on the stove? Oh, that will take care of itself; but make sure you switch off the stove before drifting off to sleep. Amazing, isn’t it, how such interruptions also result in interruptions in your diet? Inconsequential as it may seem, these electricity and water cuts have an impact on the wellbeing of citizens. We may think we have bigger things to worry about but one day, when we lose our health and are stuck in a hospital without proper facilities, we might just rue the day we did not connect the dots.
When we resume the conversation the following morning, it is the 6th of July. Ah, Independence Day. It has been 52 years of self-determination. Or has it?
Malawi, one can safely say, is the darling of international donors. Nothing, it seems, happens without invoking the almighty powers of donors. You want to build a road? There’s a donor for that. You want to drill a borehole? There’s a donor for that. You want to have a conversation about politics and the economy? There’s a donor for that. You want to adopt a starving, orphaned child? There’s a Madonna for that.
The new enemies have revealed themselves – corruption, lack of vision, lack of empathy and systematic disenfranchisement of citizens from development.
Interestingly, there was a time when you could separate the 33-year dictatorship of Hastings Kamuzu Banda from the democratic dispensation ushered in in 1994. Twenty-two years later, as memories of that painful era fade, the new enemies have revealed themselves – corruption, lack of vision, lack of empathy and systematic disenfranchisement of citizens from development. It is these enemies that many young people – the largest population – in Malawi are confronting, not Banda’s ghosts.
The post-dictatorship era is one that held the promise of a decisive break from the past. Yet somewhere within the euphoria, in Bakili Muluzi we ended up with a president who would later face corruption charges and a barrage of criticism over his attempts to manipulate the constitution so that he could extend his stay in power.
Having failed to achieve this, he would go on to manipulate internal processes within his party and appoint a successor of his choice, weakening the ruling party and setting a precedent that would plague other political parties, especially those that ended up in power.
Muluzi’s successor, Bingu wa Mutharika, presided over what can aptly be described as a schizophrenic presidency. It is also a presidency that came in the midst of much unrest and political violence, which would tragically claim the life of young Epiphania Bonjesi (9), killed by a stray bullet as she sat on the veranda at her house.
Life went on, and between 2009 and 2012 we watched in utter disbelief as Mutharika undid all the work he had done in his first term. Such work had given Malawians hope and had inspired electoral confidence that, in May 2009, translated into a landslide victory for him. It all ended with a farcical episode in which attempts were made to fly Mutharika, who had died of a heart attack, out of Malawi under a false name and the pretence that he was still alive.
‘Cashgate’
Enter Joyce Banda, the first female president in Malawi and southern Africa at large. As vice president and as a victim of fierce intraparty contestations in Mutharika’s Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), she had public sympathy on her side. It didn’t help Mutharika that, leading up to his sudden death, he had presided over an economic meltdown, the closure of civic space and a catalogue of human-rights violations. We were relieved he had left the scene. Surely Joyce Banda would be different. Or so we thought.
The younger Mutharika, Peter, was the start of Joyce Banda’s problems before she became president. He was brought from the United States by his brother, awarded a ministerial post and effectively groomed for the presidency, in preparation for the 2014 vote. That plan, of course, was interrupted by Bingu’s sudden death in 2012. However, in 2014, the plan was put back on track as the DPP won elections, sending Banda into voluntary exile while catapulting Peter into State House.In her, we ended up with a president who was more popular abroad than she was at home. Banda’s blitz presidency, during which she claimed awards and accolades and entered into questionable deals, would become known in Malawi as ‘Cashgate’ – the biggest theft of public resources ever recorded in the country.
Malawians came to know about how big monies were systematically siphoned off government accounts through some creative bookkeeping and how lowly government employees built themselves mansions – some with aquariums suspended from the ceiling – while morgue refrigeration units at the capital’s largest referral hospital were not working.
We saw, among them, future leaders who will one day overcome their pain and transform Malawi into the dazzling beauty it has always promised to be.
Recently, in the midst of a hunger crisis, President Mutharika said Malawians complaining about hunger should consider eating mice and grasshoppers as part of an alternative diet. While he might have been hinting at the critical issues of food diversity and food sovereignty in Malawi, many Malawians took him seriously?
Past, present and future



This is where we find ourselves as a nation, 52 years into independence. As ordinary citizens, we have repeatedly watched as those who occupy the highest office in the land govern according to their own interests, unaccountable to anyone. It is a pattern that started in 1964, was refined in 1994 and has been constantly updated with every change of government, including the latest.
We both work in media. As we reflected on Malawi’s 52nd anniversary of its independence, we chose to revisit some of our work and extracted what we think are texts and images that best encapsulate Malawi in its current form.
In this reflection, we heard voices of women who, when they fall pregnant, plan for the worst possible outcome and not for the joy ahead. We saw the resilience of midwives who eventually deliver these babies under the most trying conditions. They have neither facilities nor equipment, but faithfully show up and deliver, literally.
We encountered boys and girls whose warm and beautiful smiles betray the poverty fate has marked for them. We could not fit into the shoes of other boys and girls, repeatedly raped and forced into early marriages with partners they have not chosen because, i) there are no shoes to literally speak of here and ii), the pain encountered by these young lives is simply unimaginable. Still, we saw, among them, future leaders who will one day overcome their pain and transform Malawi into the dazzling beauty it has always promised to be.
At the moment, this beauty lies in the ability of most Malawians to rise above their daily challenges and incessant provocations from the State and its institutions. They contribute something meaningful towards a better Malawi. This beauty lies in the woman selling groundnuts, honestly trying to navigate the tortured terrain of her country; the teacher whose patience endures all 60 demanding voices in his classroom; the young men and women turning their backs on a life of crime and choosing to become entrepreneurs, notwithstanding the fact that their government does nothing to support them in their cause.
Against this backdrop, the betrayal of the independence promise is not only palpable, it is infuriating. Zimbabwean writer and poet Dambudzo Marechera says it best when he screams:
Lynch those who hoard our national dream,
lining their pockets
with coins from the povo’s hymn.
The day is done, yet another reminder that the ripeness of independence produces no harvest for the starving masses except betrayal, death and decay.

Malawian men fall in love with HIV self-testing – PSI

Population Service International (PSI) Malawi and UNITAID are currently piloting the HIV Self-Testing (HIVST) project in the country and the exercise is proving more acceptable by men as compared to the previous arrangement of testing in healthy facilities.



HIV self-test kits
PSI Program manager, Richard Chilongosi revealed that more men are utilizing  HIV Self-Testing due to its convenience and flexibility in terms of time and privacy.
The HIV Self-Testing kit is a self conducted test which utilized various bodily fluids including saliva and does not require needles as one swabs the bodily fluids and self runs the test whose results are conclusive within 20 minutes.
“The test is done by one’s self at  their chosen time at a chosen place and also the oneself testing knows the results first before anyone else and for these reasons, men have fallen in love with the mechanism.
Chilongosi gave an example of Chifunga health centre in Neno where 543 self testing kits were distributed and men had 58 percent of the kits.
“ All along women have been in the forefront in as far as HIV testing is concerned for the fact that they frequent health facilities due to various reasons ranging from maternal to children under five clinics through which they get exposed to HIV testing as compared to men,” explained Chilongosi.
The HIV Self-Testing has also proven a solution to the common excuses that men used to pose for not patronizing HIV testing in health facilities due to long distances that were deemed time consuming as such not friendly to most men who are in most cases very industrious to fetch for and busy their families.
“Men are mostly busy people as such most of them never visited HIV testing centers and this Self-Testing method is here to break that barrier,” added Chilongosi.
PSI Malawi’s HIV ambassador, American actress Debra Messing who recently visited Malawi to see how the HIV Self-Testing Africa (STAR) project is settling in Malawi, expressed hope in the initiative as it appears well embraced by the people on the ground including men.
Messing   referred to the project as a game changer in as far as Malawi’s fight against the HIV and AIDS by ensuring that all manners of people access the test which is the first step for one to make an informed decision.
“ It is  difficult to get  men to the health  centre, they do not want to be seen queuing for the test, they do not have the time to walk for 5 to 6 hours which is sometimes required to get to the nearest health facility in some areas, so the STAR is the solution,” explained Messing.
Ministry of health’s spokes person, Adrian Chikumbe said government is impressed with STAR project as it is bringing the test to a different group within the population to the usual which has always tested even during HIV testing campaign weeks resulting in no yielded results.
Chikumbe explained that chances are there that the project will be rolled out national wide based on the great results being derived in the piloted districts of Neno, Mwanza, Machinga and Blantyre.
“At the moment its only 50 percent of the people that are HIV positive that are aware of their status and the STAR initiative will help in increasing the number of those aware of their status as this cuts though the distance and time barrier,” explained Chimbali.
The STAR initiative which is being piloted in Malawi, Zambia, Zimbawe and South Africa is expected to join in Phase two is targeting people in hard to reach areas, special groups like Men who have sex with Men (MSMs) and female sex workers.
The STAR project is directly dealing with the hindrances that may negatively affect the 90-90-90 goals which include privacy concerns, limited access to HIV testing services (HTS).

Mchacha dismantles DPP structures in Kalindo constituency: MP kicked out of party

Ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) has finally kicked out “attention seeker” MP Bon Kalindo and has since dismantled all constituency political structures for Mulanje South constituency.



Mchacha: Kalindo has no control of DPP structure in his constituency
The decision to fire Kalindo comes barely 10 days after he was summoned to a disciplinary hearing.
DPP regional governor for the south Charles Mchacha confirmed that the party was replacing all political structures set up by Kalindo in Mulanje South.
“We are reorganising the party in the constituency because we discovered that they were set up without following party policy,” said Mchacha.
This literally means Kalindo has been kicked out of the DPP.  The MP resigned his post at deputy spokesman and as a members of the National Governing Council.
Mchacha said Kalindo will have nothing to do with the new constituency committee which he said will be set up soon.
Kalindo, a comedian-cum-politician, is accused of insurbodination after he organised a nude protest a few weeks ago to demonstrate against the barbaric killings of people with albinism.
DPP says he should have asked for permission from the party before urging Malawians to walk naked.
Kalindo said he is yet to receive communication on the matter.
He will however remain MP for his constituency until 2019 when the mandate of all legislators expire.

Mitra saves Ndirande Icons from disbanding: Now call them Mitra Icons

Malawi’s second tier football league promising team Ndirande Icons has been saved from the verge of disbanding due to financial constraints by Malawi’s market research company, Market Insights Tracking (Mitra).
Ndirande Icons now known as Mitra Icons
The team is currently leading the country’s Southern Region Football League’s Premier Division, which is sponsored by Masters Security Services.
Mitra’s Managing Director Albert Chigoga said Mitra has the desire to run the team as a professional entity to compete all the way into the top flight TNM Super League.
“Despite the team participating in the second tier league of Malawi football, this team is ambitious and resilient and I see nothing stopping us from achieving this dream of qualifying into the Super League,” Chigoga said.
He said it was  Malawi’s former prolific striker Heston Munthali who tipped one of the team’s administrator and coach, Fletcher Chirwa, to approach Chigoga for possible assistance when the team was planning to deregister itself from league participation because of financial constraints.



“Fletcher is one of the team’s coaches and he was the sole financier of the club. He spoke to my football coordinator, Heston Munthali, who asked him to approach me because Heston knows we have always harboured the desire to contribute towards football development in whatever capacity.
“There were more than two teams that approached us for sponsorship but after weighing all the options , Ndirande Icons became our ultimate choice.
“We decided on Ndirande Icons because it is a team full of blossoming talent with mostly young people from Ndirande, the location famous with its versatility. My vision in sports is very great. We would like to run Mitra Icons as a professional entity despite it being in the regional league.
“This team will fight all the way into the Super League and will make its own history in Malawi football . We are providing the team with everything required for a football team to excel,” said Chigoga, who is now the chairman of the club.
Mitra has also provided a practising medical practitioner as a team doctor and it is also paying the coaching staff and meeting the crucial needs of players.
Coach Fletcher Chirwa has been running the club since it started in 2002 and Heston Munthali helps as a technical advisor.
They are leading a 22 member premier league with 26 points from 11 games.
Mitra recently won an international award for its excellence, track record and its adherence to and development of its own quality management policies.
The recognition, which is one of the biggest international recognitions for organisational quality in the world, was made by Spain-based Business Initiative Directions (BID).
The marketing research firm based in Blantyre  specialises in helping client companies come to some of the most important decisions in business by providing high quality, relevant and properly weighted information, which is gathered according to the highest industry standards.

Mutharika says Malawians should be proud of his honourary degree from Addis Ababba University

President Peter Mutharik has said Maalwians should proud of his  honourary Degree of Doctor of Letter (D.Litt) honoris causa by the Addis Ababa University.
President Peter Mutharika is welcomed by Vice President Dr.Saulos Chilima on arrival at Kamuzu International Airport(C)Stanley Makuti
President Peter Mutharika is welcomed by Police and Army Officers on arrival at Kamuzu International Airport(C)Stanley Makuti
Mutharika said this when he returned home Sunday afternoon from Addis Ababa Ethiopia where he was conferred  the degree.
“It is an honour to me, but as the President of Malawi obviously I would hope that Malawians should also appreciate that it is an honour to the country as a whole,” said Mutharika.
Speaking on arrival at Kamuzu International Airport (KIA) in Lilongwe, Mutharika said this is an indication of their appreciation of the efforts that the government is doing to move Malawi from aid to drain and all the structures put in place.
He mentioned some structures such as water and irrigation among others.
Mutharika said the degree is in among the highest honours the institution confers on exceptional individuals with proven track records of academic excellence.



He  therefore encouraged the youth to work extra hard to attain high qualifications so as to change the face of Malawi and Africa as a whole in economically.
Mutharika also  urged Malawians to be patriotic, have integrity, work hard and strive for positive results in everything they do if the country is to transform economically.

Mutharika under fire for chartering plane as Malawi economy is teetering  on a brink of total collapse

Malawi President Peter Mutharika has come under fire for chartering a plane to get a personal honarary degree when he is preaching austerity amid abject poverty, acute food shortages and a sinking economy – prompting analysts and opposition to observe that the DPP administration is failing to “rig the economy”.
President Peter Mutharika is welcomed by Police and Army Officers on arrival at Kamuzu International Airport(C)Stanley Makuti
Mutharika disembarks a a private plane he took to Addis Abbaba
Mutharika chartered a South African plane to go to Ethiopia where he got a doctorate degree of Letters.
Mustafa Hussein, lecturer at University of Malawi’s Chancellor College described the president action as regrettable.
“The country is going through turbulent economic times and for the problem to charter a plane to get a personal degree the university was honouring him for his past career goes against the same spirit of austerity which he always tell us,” said Hussein.
He said the country is going through deep probems including acute food shortages.
“Ethiopia is just four hours away therefore it was unnecessary for the president to charter a plane,” he said.
Mutharika has been conferred the doctorate degree of Letters from the University of Addis Ababa where he lectured for years before trekking to the US.
Information minister Patricia Kaliati said she did not know if the State House chartered a plane for the president but described the criticisms as “jealousy.”



She said some Malawians are funny that instead of being thankful that their head of state has been conferred an honarary degree they are  busy fault finding.
Speaking on arrival from Ethiopia, President Mutharika said he was conferred the honarary degree because of his efforts to turn Malawi from a donor dependent to a trade dependent.
In addition, he said, the university was honouring him because of his efforts to improve on electricity outages and water woes.
However as he spoke, some parts of the Capiital City, Lilongwe had no water and electricity.

Mwezi Wawala (Tithyole Dansi) – 20 Malawian Artists



Mzuzu Academy students’ project to reach underprivileged peers wins them ‘Your World’ award

A video about six Mzuzu Academy students teaching English and Mathematics to their peers from a local community-based organisation in Mzuzu became a regional winner in ‘Your World Competition’ which was run by British Council earlier in the year.
The students at the British Council
The students being recognised
One of the students receiving the recognition
On Monday, the students Rahim Michael Sadik, Mathew Mbale, Wongani Lungu, Kike Nyirenda, Tamara Msachi and Tupochele Chatuwa were honoured in a prize presentation ceremony held at British Council office in Lilongwe.
Director of British Council in Malawi, Reena Johl, said she was proud that Mzuzu Academy has put Malawi on the map through their inspiring video.
“As the name of the competition, Your World, suggests, this was a global schools competition which allowed students to share with their colleagues around the world a picture of their lives. We are delighted that Mzuzu Academy won with their impressive and innovative entry that is mutually benefitting the school and community,” said Johl
Speaking on behalf of his colleagues after receiving the prizes, one of the students, Rahim Michael Sadik, said they were happy to be crowned regional winners of ‘Your World’ Competition.
“The feeling is unimaginable because the video which we produced, of teaching English and Mathematics to young boys and girls at Kwithu CBO, which is a way of giving back to community while helping us to reinforce what we learn in class, became a winning entry and we thank British Council for the opportunity,” said Sadik.



The students were handed beautiful framed pictures of themselves, branded t-shirts and two certificates each (one for participation and another as regional winners).
Your World Competition was an opportunity for students around the world to use their creativity and connect with each other while providing a window into their unique lives, environment and experiences. You can watch Mzuzu Academy’s winning video and other  on http://britishcouncilyw.vids.io

Ndilira: Mike Akitivi new music video





Shortly after releasing new music under Mathumela Productions, musician Mike Akitivi has released a music video for the song “Ndilira”.
The fresh video has Mike Akitivi showcasing his dancing skills in the Rhumba beat produced by Lulu.
Shot at Livingstonia Beach in Salima, Lilongwe and in Ireland, the video also features three Lilongwe dancers with some erotic dance moves.

Onesimus Muzik – Miracle Money



Over 300 Mozambican refugees refuse to relocate in Malawi

Government and United Nations officials in Malawi are helpless after over 300 Mozambican refugees refused to be relocated to Luwani Refugee camp in Mwanza from Kayisi in the same district.
Mozambique refugees fleeing to poor Malawi
UNHCR Monique Koko said she does not understand why the refugees are refusing to relocate to a camp which has all the facilities including a functioning clinic and school.
“This is a puzzle to us because where they are there are no facilities because it is not a refugee camp but a village,” said Koko.
Koko however said over 1800 refugees have relocated to Luwani where she said they have been provided with all necessities including food and tents.
She said the relocation exercise ended on June 30.



Koko said UNHR together with its sister organisation, Unicef will also ensure that Luwani refugee camp has potable water.
Mozambican refugees are flocking to Malawi following slirmishes in their country between ruling Frelimo and rebels Renamo.

Patient dies after a ward caught fire at Zomba Mental Hospital

One patient has died while 26 others survived when a male ward caught fire Tuesday night at Zomba Mental Hospital, police have confirmed.
Zomba Mental Hospital (ZMH) Director Immaculate Chamangwana confirmed that they have lost one patient identified as Raymond Chipeta,32 of Ezondweni village Traditional Authority T/A Mtwalo in Mzimba district.
Shesaid the fire started from a Sluice room where they keep dirty linen before they take them for laundry.
‘’We received a report from one of our nurses, Steve Majawa who was on duty last night that one of the male wards had caught fire around 11 pm. We tried to rescue 26 out of 27 patients in that particular ward and later noticed that one of them was completely burnt inside the sluice room where the fire seems to have originated from,”explained Chamangwana.



She said the hospital management reported immediately to Zomba City Council Fire Fighters, the Police and ESCOM officials for assistance as they were trying to evict other patients to rehabilitation ward.
“The fire fighters from Zomba City Council arrived earlier to stop the fire extending to other buildings and managed to reduce extent of damages.
“After having met with all concerned officers from Police, ESCOM and Officials from Mental Hospital at Postmortem meeting, the Fire Officer,Lodias Sendaluzi suspected that the patient may have had something which he used to start the fire since the room has no socket but only a light bulb far up the roof.”
He said his office has experience a similar case where one of the patients at the facility set fire on the mattress using matches she was keeping through her private parts.
The body of the late Reymond Chipeta was taken to Zomba Central Hospital Mortuary.
No any other damage has been reported apart from the loss of the patient, beddings from sluice room and damage of part of the building.
Reports from ZCC Fire Department indicates that this is the second fire accident after the first one which took place two years ago when a female patient at the facility set fire on her mattress during the day.
 

Petroleum Importers  donate medical items worth K2.5mil to Kamboni Health Centre

Petroleum Importers Limited (PIL) has donated various medical items worth K2.5million to Kamboni Health Centre in Kasungu as part of its social corporate responsibility.
PIL presenting the donantion
Presenting the donation, PIL General Manager, Enewell Kadango said o Monday his company was touched with the pathetic situation at the health centre which lacked basic medical items.
“As a company we felt obliged to come in and assist by giving them medical equipment and supplies so that the centre can continue to serve people,” he said.
He described his company as a transparent and socially responsible whose overall aim was to transform lives of all Malawians at all levels.
Medical In-charge at the Health Centre, Bon Mpokonyola commended the company for the assistance they brought at the centre.
“This donation has come at the right time and it will go a long way in saving lives of people of this area,” he said.
He said the facility was failing to manage some situations which were manageable due to lack of equipment thereby resulting to loss of lives.



Some of the conditions like asthma and those lacking oxygen can now be treated right at the health centre, he said.
The items donated include Nebulizer, Oxygen Concentrator, Mattresses, wheel chair, beds and Ultra-scan gel among others
Kamboni Health Centre serve a population of 27,000 people and is situated 72kilometers west of Kasungu district.

Poly journalism symposium Friday at Mount Soche

Final year Bachelor of Arts in Journalism students at the Polytechnic of the University of Malawi will on Friday July, 8, 2016 hold a symposium at Sunbird Mount Soche in Blantyre to showcase their newly acquired skills and knowledge to prospective employers and clients in corporate world.
Carol Maziya
Chairperson for the symposium organizing committee Carolyn Maziya said the symposium will be held under the theme “Geared towards Media Innovations and Entrepreneurship” and will bring together students, academic staff and representatives of various companies and organisations for a lively seminar aimed at introducing the prospective journalism graduates to future employers and clients.
“You may have noted that we are also referring to representatives of companies and organisations as prospective clients and not just as employers because we believe entrepreneurship is another avenue the students have to pursue after their studies,” said Maziya.
“One of the modules we covered during our studies is a new one called Special Projects where every student come up with an examinable new and innovative media product,” said Maziya.
She said during the symposium, the students will make presentations and displays showcasing some of the innovations.
The guest of honour at the symposium is expected to be the chief executive officer of TNM or his representative who will talk about how journalism graduates can use mobile phone technology and the Internet to set up enterprises and come up with innovations in Malawi’s media.
MCA-Malawi will also make a presentation on the importance of the US$350 million USA-funded Compact Programme for Malawi through which funding is being provided towards various energy sector projects and reform programmes.



There will also be a presentation from a model media entrepreneur who will share knowledge and experience as well as motivate and inspire the students on the possibilities of setting up enterprises, even with limited or no capital at all.
The class has 48 students, who include 8 in the mature entry programme who did their studies during weekends.
The main sponsor for the symposium is TNM. The Millennium Challenge Account-Malawi (MCA-M), the Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (Macra), the Technical Vocational Educational and Training Authority (Teveta) and Carlsberg Malawi have also provide financial and material support towards the symposium.

Prophet Bushiri comments on ‘Blood of Jesus’ selling allegations

Prophet Shepherd Bushiri, leader and founder of the Enlightened Christian Gathering (ECG) church has strongly refuted rumours that have been going strong in the media claiming that he is selling the blood of Jesus bottles.
Bushiri: People seek attention by denting my name
According to reports on different blogs, it was alleged that the man of God is selling the healing power blood of Jesus at R20 thousand to R30 thousand (approximately MK1 million) per bottle.
However, in an exlusive interview with Nyasa Times from his office in Sandton at the World Trade Center Tower, Bushiri refuted the claims saying that is simply the work of some blogs to find traffic for their websites to make money.
“I never used to understand these things myself until lately when I discovered that most of the stories about me are fabricated by unknown blog and news website owners because anything with my name attached is usually shared a lot by people and everyone wants to read about it.
“When you open such links, you will find different adverts usually offered by Google. For such adverts to make money, they need traffic and the more people they get to their websites, the more money they make and this trend will go on for as long as I rise. People should just learn to seek the truth before making conclusions and cursing men of God,” explained Bushiri.
“People should not rush to believe anything they see on social media. We have reliable newspapers they can always cross check before they rush to conclude. All these unknown blogs that are busy tarnishing my image by writing false things are operated by anonymous people trying to make money, in the end, they are feeding on my name, a thing that is also negatively affecting the faith of believers.
“If people want to know about the anointing materials at my church, all they need to do come to our church and check on our official websites. There is no one in this life who can come forward to claim that they bought the said blood of Jesus at the ECG church and my followers are even baffled about the reports because they have never seen that as reported by Malawi Voice and Malawi Independent, the only newspapers in Malawi that write all sorts of false reports about me for political gains,” he continued.



“I cant always control what blogs post on the internet, I only pray to God that believers should see this coming and brace up because we do not wrestle against flesh. In the end, I will continue to do the work of God and bring more souls to Christ because that is my work and I promised God to do it whole heartedly no matter the challenges I face on the way,”
According to google, AdSense (Google AdSense) is an advertising placement service by Google. The program is designed for website publishers who want to display targeted text, video or image advertisements on website pages and earn money when site visitors view or click the ads.
Gibson Malunga, a popular blogger and author at Zimbabwe24 explained that websites that get a lot of visitors make more money with AdSense. For an article involving such a popular figure like Prophet Shepherd Bushiri can make up to $1000 USD in less than a week (About MK700 thousand). To achieve this, bloggers tend to write negative stories because more people rush to read negative stories than positive reports.

Prophet Bushiri’s Bible Up-Close:Pray often, God is listening

Prayer comes in different forms and dimensions, but it is all one act; talking with God. The fact that we are spiritual beings in the physical makes prayer an essential tool in our daily lives for triumph, because the dark spiritual forces are relentlessly attacking, meditating and planning deep on how to set snares against us.



With his snares, the devil is up on a mission to entice you into committing his will. He is relentless on his efforts to enslave you in poverty and sickness as well as force a premature death upon you the child of God. But the grace of God has not surpassed your protection. We read in Jeremiah 29:11 that God gives us victory over sin and death through our Lord Jesus Christ. His presence is our rock, and we know that no one can harm us except He allows it. As _*Lamentations 3:22-23*_ declares, through the Lord’s mercies we are not consumed, bcause His compassions fail not.
We are at war. Successiful soldiers never chill up in the battlefield. We can’t take our blankets along when all we need are weapons of mass destruction. Weapons with which to repel the dark forces. This weapon is the prayer to our faithful and victorious God who made this victory available to us through our Lord Jesus Christ as confirmed in *_1 Corinthians 15:57._*
While the prayer really changes things situations to our favour, we dearly need to understand how it does that. Honest Prayer to the Lord can be that Anti-Barristic missile in your life. It can be your Bazooka if you align it with reading of the Bible. The reason why satan catches you easily sometimes, is beacause he never sleeps in studying you, but you don’t even study the Bible that much. Failure to read the Bible with understanding is tantamount to you, as a soldier, chilling in the battle field. Do you expect to overcome when you pray in your blankets, falling asleep before you even finish? Wake up! _”Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour,” 1 Peter 5:8. KJV_
With a positive thinking, you can change your life around. You can triumph over the devil. I was teaching about the Rayoni anointing this other day. It is important to Noema your visions’ execution with prayer. Heaven has opened and God is ready for your prayers. The blood of Jesus on the cross weakened the chains so that they are easily broken at your prayer. The blood of Jesus has allowed you and I to overcome the evil one. Don’t let him set up snares for you again. God is waiting for your prayers as He says in _*Jeremiah 29:12*_ that; _”Then you will call on me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you”._  God is confirming His commitment toward our victory in _*John 16:33*_ where He says _”I have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. In this world you will have trouble. But take heart! I have overcome the world.”_
The Lord has overcome the world and victory belongs to him *[Jeremiah 29:11].* If you are a Christian and a child of God, it means you have a character of an overcomer. You cannot continue to live in defeat when you have the DNA of God. You cannot continue to live in poverty when silver and gold are His. You cannot be sick and lack healing when you have the healer inside of you. Pray and God is waiting to hear you say you need Him. Pray and He is there to answer your prayers. A prayerful person is a successful person for he follows instructions of the Lord.
As you start a new prayer life, it is vital to have positive thoughts. The Rayoni anointing works best in such an environment, and executing these thoughts and visions will invite God to work out things for your good, blessing you with Noema. “Rejoice always, pray without ceasing, give thanks in all circumstances; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you.” _*[1 Thess 5:16-18 ESV].*

Standard Bank empowers customers with single biometric and cross border banking accessibility

Standard Bank, Africa’s largest bank by assets, has seen its mobile traffic growing 100 per cent a year as customers embrace more convenient and efficient solutions for their banking needs.
A customer holds a Standard Bank card
A statement from headquarters in Johannesburg, South Africa issued on July 10, said during year 2015, over 825 million financial transactions worth R430 billion were processed through the banking app.
“As a consequence of this, branch transactional volumes have declined and ATM and branch transactions now make up less than 5 percent of total banking transactions,” the statement said,” quoting Peter Schlebusch, Standard Bank’s Chief Executive for Personal and Business Banking.
“Ninety five percent of Standard Bank’s transactions are already electronic, making it a genuinely digital bank. The vast bulk of Standard Bank’s Personal & Business Banking strategy to 2020 is about how we can use digital capabilities to deliver an even better customer experience.
“This entails putting customers in control, providing more convenience, and extracting key customer insights from our rich data so that the bank becomes more proactive, relevant and easy to use.”
Online and app banking is reported to have truly transformed the way customers engage with their bank, enabling them to bank on their terms whenever they want.
Schlebusch says Standard Bank has invested in IT infrastructure to ensure that the bank has a single view of the customer, and the customer has a single instant view of their complete banking services regardless of geography, product or customer segment.
The app includes the ability to open accounts online, move money across borders quickly and easily, trade shares internationally on 29 stock exchanges and even lodge homeowner insurance claims off a single mobile device.
Most customers now bank outside of traditional banking hours. A high peak hour is between 8:00am and 09:00am
The bank is upgrading its entire core banking systems in an effort to meet the continually changing behaviour of customers. The fully functional new core banking platform in South Africa is processing substantial volumes, with approximately 570 million transactions processed in 2015, 27 percent more than in 2014.



Across the rest of Africa the bank already has 73 percent of personal & business banking customers on its new core banking system.
Standard Bank says it will continue to leverage off increased smartphone penetration. In Africa, the internet is being predominantly accessed by the smart mobile device.
“We are committed to Africa and proudly call the continent our home. Africa loves mobile,” Schlebusch said. “This is why we are so excited about how technology and data is allowing us to get even closer to our customers.
“We are steadfast on a strategy of tapping into the increasing use of technology, like smartphones, tablets and wearables, across the continent to become a truly integrated internet-based financial services business.
‘’Our aim is to be always on and always connected, while providing biometric authentication and extensive use of data analytics to personalise the customer experience to a far larger degree,” he said.

Stop running and let God deliver you

Today I would like to encourage those that have convinced themselves that God is no longer with them in the midst of their situations. God will always be with us, but it is us who moves away from Him. Many times we have tried to wander as sheep has from the right path thinking our ways would be the best yet that is why we have all the problems we are facing now (Isaiah 53:6).



Jonah thought he could flee from the presence of the Lord, which is where most of us are right now. It is not that we don’t know God, but we are still trying to run away from God. There is no way that we can run away from God because He is the only one in total control over all His creation.
The bible tells us about the story of Jonah and how he thought he could run away from God. The book of Jonah reveals that God is always where we are and knows our hidden thoughts that no man is able to see. Jonah did not discuss His plans of running away from doing the work of God with anyone, but God knew what was in the mind of Jonah.
Many of God’s children are in the same situation as Jonah was, trying to do things using our own ways yet you can see things are not getting where you want to be. When we are running away from God, nothing will work the way we want unless we decide to back to what want us to do.
All that is required is to surrender again to God and confess to God for not listening to His voice.  Our God is a God of love as you can see from Jonah that, when Jonah was cast forth into the sea, the Lord had already prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. Still in the belly of the fish, Jonah prayed to the same God that He was running away from to deliver him. If you talk about love and mercy then it belongs to our God because God knew that Jonah was running away from Him yet when he called on His name, He heard his cry and spoke unto the fish to vomit him upon the dry land (Jonah 2:1-10).
The situation that you are going through may feel like you are in the belly of the fish that swallowed Jonah because there does not seem to be any hope that you will get out of it. The God that heard Jonah’s prayer while in the fish’s belly can also hear your prayer. In times of desperation comes an earnest prayer from the heart that is able to turn around a situation that seems impossible. The fish that has swallowed you will not be able to stand the heat of prayers that will come from you but to vomit you.
Even though it is our fault that we have turned away from God, just like the situation with Jonah, Our God will not look at that, but to speak to the situation to vomit us out upon the dry land. The most beautiful thing about our God is that He does not judge us based on what we did yesterday (Jeremiah 31:34).

Student at Malawi College of Accountancy arrested for shoplifting at PTC-Metro:  Blames his poverty for theft

A 30 year old Financial Accounting student at Malawi College of Accountancy (MCA)-Blantyre Campus was on Tuesday afternoon arrested by the police after he was caught stealing assorted items from Balaka PTC-Metro Shop.
Some of the stollen items
Owen: Says he is poor
Balaka Police Public Relations Officer (PRO) Constable Gerald Sumaili identified the suspect as Victor Owen.
Sumaili said at around 2:00pm on Tuesday, Owen entered into Metro shop and took various items including Vaseline Body Lotion, tablets of soap, packets of Kamba and milk among others valued at K22, 075 and attempted to go out withou paying.



“He hid most of these items in his jacket he wore and he tried to get out of the shop without paying. The moment he was making his last steps out of the shop,  one of the workers noticed and attempted to stop him.
“The suspect tried to run away but was caught by police officers who rushed to the scene since the shop is just few meters away from Balaka police” explained Constable Sumaili .
He said the suspect was also found with a bag he had kept at a nearby place suspected to have again been stollen from one of the shops in Balaka.
The suspect straight away appeared before court where he confessed he indeed commited the crime.
He said he was tempted to steal since he is poor hence failure to purchase basic needs.
Owen hails from Chikwatu Village in the Area of Traditional Authority Mwambo in Zomba district.

TNM opens new flagship shop in Balaka

As one way of fulfilling its goals of ensuring wide coverage, premier mobile network and ICT service provider, TNM is pleased to announce the official opening of its Balaka flagship shop.
Now open ! Balaka shop
Mateawuma waving a ribbon after official opening.
The Balaka shop is one of 26flagship shops that TNM has opened this year across the country in a bid to bring its product and services closer to its customers.
Speaking during the official opening TNM‘s Chief Commercial  Officer, Daniel Makata said the opening of the Balaka shop aims to provide convenience to customers as it is strategically opposite NBS Bank at the heart of Balaka town.
“The new shop provides more space and therefore increase our customer care touch points. We are always thriving to improve the customer experience through provision of a customer-friendly and centric environment by bringing services closer to our valued customers,” said Makata.
He said the shop will support Balaka with its mobile and ICT needs and those of travelers.
Apart from hosting government, civil society, SME and agri-enterprises, Balaka is also a gateway to Lake Malawi, the M1 road as well as Zomba City, Malawi’s major academic centre.
Makata said TNM has extended shop opening hours to give more time for customers to transact at the new shop.
“Initially TNM shops were opening at 7:30 am and closing at 5:00 pm but now they will be opening at 7:30 am and closing at 7:00 pm. We hope this will cater for the increase in demand of our services as we bring it closer to customers and serve them better” said the Chief Commercial Officer.



Balaka District Commisioner, Rodrick Mateawuma hailed TNM for the timely business decision to set shop in Balaka. He said Balaka is a fast growing town and district as it plays host various government ministries and departments, local and international NGOs as well as a booming cotton industry among others and deserved the TNM presence a long time ago.
“Previously most of these services could only be accessible either in Ntcheu or Zomba. I wish to applaud TNM for the sound business decision to invest in Balaka. I can assure you that this shop has timely responded to our need and there could never have been a better time to move into Balaka than now,” said Mateawuma.
Services available at the Balaka shop include all Mpamba transactions, sim card replacements, airtime purchases, general inquiries and other TNM related services. The other shops have been opened in Blantyre, Zomba, Nchalo,Lilongwe, Ntcheu,Kasungu,Mangochi,Mzimba and Mzuzu among others.

Tempers flare in Malawi Parliament: Kaliati’s denies making cashgate slurs

Tempers flared high on Monday as opposition legislators demanded an apology from Information minister Patricia Kaliati who accused the  opposition MCP and PP legislators of being silent since the K577 billion report came out.
Kaliati: Denied making slurs
Vitus Dzoole Mwale, Lilongwe Msozi South MP (MCP) brought to the attention of Speaker Richard Msowoya that Kaliati had mumrmured something out of the microphone.
“I want her to stand up and say it here so that I can answered her now,” said the seemingly angry Mwale.
Mwale said the minister accused him of taking part in the loot of the money, saying this was why the Malawi Congress Party (MCP)  legislator was silent.
“These are very serious allegations Mr Speaker. Malawians are suffering out there because of the looting of this money and connect me to this is very unfair,” he said.
But Kaliati stood to protest that she did not make any slurs.
“Mr Speaker Sir , what is it that  I have said for the honourable members to say things like that,” querried Kaliati.
The Speaker said he didnt hear the minister making any comment.
On his part, Peoples Party leader in the House Uladi Mussa demanded that the House sets aside the debate on Land Bill and start debate on the K577 billion ‘grand corruptuon’ scandal.
The emotionally charged Mussa, who is also Salima South MP, had to be calmed by Speaker Richard Msowoya who asked the charismatic politician to cool down and behave as leader in the House.



Kaliati is alleged to have said that the MCP and PP parliamentarians were mum on the matter because the report says most of the K577 billion was looted during the Joyce Banda regime.
Leader of the House told the opposition that it was a waste of tax payers money to derail debate on Land bill and start infighting for an issue outside the program.
However, Speaker Msowoya, who stamps authority in the 193 strong House said it was Kaliati, a government minister who provoked the situation.
He however calmed the situation and debate on the Land bill continued smoothly.
The audit of the ‘grand corruption’ says there are $14.2 million in overpayments for goods and services; one duplicate payment of $5.45 million which the report says should be subject to immediate recovery; and $29 166 overpayment on shipping to wrong locations.

Tight race at top of TNM Super League table

At position 10, TNM Super League champions Nyasa Big Bullets have a tough task to defend their title as they are 11 points down against the current leaders Blue Eagles.
Silver campaign on track
Bullets have 16 points from 10 games played of four wins, four draws and two losses while the leaders Blue Eagles enjoy the summit with 25 points from 11 games of eight wins, one draw and two losses.
Coming second are Silver Strikers with 23 points from 11 games of seven wins, two draws and two losses while Mafco are third with 22 points from 12 games of six wins, four draws and two losses.
Mafco tie on 22 points with fellow soldiers Kamuzu Barracks, who have played more games at 14 in which they won six, drew four and also lost four.
The defending champions Bullets have found themselves in this awkward position after being on a three-week break when they contributed a bulk of their players for national duty during the Flames’ engagement in June for the Africa Cup of Nations qualifier against Zimbabwe and the Cosafa Cup in Namibia, where they were ousted after their three group qualifying games.
When they came back the other contenders had already gained ground.
Their arch rivals Mighty Be Forward Wanderers were also affected by the Flames’ engagements. They are on position nine with 17 points from 10 games of four wins, five draws and one loss.
Big Bullets host rookies Max Bullets at Kamuzu Stadium on Wednesday, July 20, while Wanderers face Wizards FC at Kamuzu Stadium this Saturday.
Wizards are on position 13 with 12 points from 11 games of three wins, three draws and five losses while Max Bullets are at the bottom of the 16-team log table with four points from no win, four draw and eight losses.
The leaders Blue Eagles travel to Dwangwa on Sunday to meet third-placed Mafco FC at Chitowe Stadium, a day after 2nd-placed Silver Strikers meet Dwangwa United at the same venue.
The other fixture for the weekend is that between 12th-placed Red Lions with 13 points from 12 games of four wins, one draw and seven losses against Mzuni FC (position 7 with 20 points from Mzuni 12 games of six wins, two draws and four losses) at Zomba Community Centreon Saturday.
Meanwhile, Mafco’s Richard Mbulu scored two goals when his team beat rookies Karonga United 5-0 last weekend to add his tally of goals to eight and become the leading scorer.
A total of 222 goals have been scored from 95 matches played with Mbulu at eight and Manasseh Chiyesa (Kamuzu Barracks) and Anthony Banda (Epac FC) tying at seven.
At six goals there is Kuda Muyaba (Moyale), Peter Wadabwa (Mighty Be Forward Wanderers) and Chiukepo Msowoya (Nyasa Big Bullets).



With four goals are Gilbert Chirwa, Maxwell Salambula (both for Blue Eagles), Moses Nankumba (Red Lions), Harvey Mkacha (Kamuzu Barracks), Yamikani Chester, Bright Munthali (Azam Tigers), Nelson Kangunje (Civo United), Lughindiko Mushani (Mzuni FC), Binwell Katinji (Silver Strikers) and Gastin Simkonda (Moyale).
So far, four players have scored hat-tricks — Mighty Be Forward Wanderers striker Peter Wadabwa, Anthony Banda of (Epac FC), Gastin Simkonda (Moyale) and Maxwell Salambula (Blue Eagles).
Kamuzu Barracks lead with most goals scored at 25). Nyasa Big Bullets can take pride to be the one with strongest defence as they just conceeded seven goals from 10 matches.
Rookies MTV Max Bullets have found the going tough and remain winless after playing 12 matches while Karonga United have let in the most goals at 23 and managing to score only four goals from 12 matches.
Meanwhile, Gilbert Chirwa of Blue Eagles was player of the month of April while Lughindiko Mushani of Mzuni FC was for May.
The following is how they stand:
      P   W  D  L  GF Pts
1. Blue Eagles         11 8 1 2 20 12 25
2. Silver strikers     11 7 2 2 17   8  23
3. Mafco                  12 6 4 2 22 13  22
4. K. Barracks        14 6 4 4 25 17  22
5. Moyale                 13 6 3 4 22 16  21
6. Azam Tigers      13 5 5 3 13    8 20
7. Mzuni                   12 6 2 4 11    9 20
8. Epac                     13 6 1 6 15 14 19
9. Wanderers          10 4 5 1 15 10 17
10. Nyasa BB          10 4 4 2 12   7 16
11. Civo Utd             13 4 3 6 10 17 15
12. Red Lions         12 4 1 7 12  17 13
13. Wizards             11 3 3 5  7   10 12
14. Dwangwa         11 1 3 7  8   19 6
15. Karonga Utd    12 1 3 8  4   23 6
16. Max Bullets     12  0 4 8  9   22 4

Two Malawian journalists earn work placements wth BBC: Chevening scholars

Two Malawian journalists Joab Frank Chakhaza and Chipiliro Kansilanga  have been granted work placements with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) World Service in London.



Chipiliro Kansilanga
The two are currently in UK doing postgraduate studies under the prestigious UK government’s Chevening Scholarship Programme.
After a stiff competition with other Chevening scholars who are studying media-related programmes across UK Universities, the Malawians  were among the 10 students who were selected for four-month placements at BBC.
Chipiliro Kansilanga – from Times Group – will be attached to BBC Media Action in East London while Joab Frank Chakhaza  – from Zodiak – will be attached with BBC Focus on Africa – Radio.
The placement runs from 5 September 2016 to 4 January 2017.
The work placements are part of many exciting packages under the Chevening Scholarship Programme that are arranged by the UK government.
From London, Joab Frank Chakhaza said:“We are proud of this achievement and wish to extend our gratitude to the British High Commission in Malawi for facilitating our attainment of a scholarship with Chevening which has proven to be a life-changing experience.”
“We are proud of this achievement and wish to extend our gratitude to the British High Commission in Malawi for facilitating our attainment of a scholarship with Chevening which has proven to be a life-changing experience.”

UNESCO gives a boost to Mzuzu University library  

Mzuzu University (Mzuni) Tuesday got yet another boost to its library services after the Malawi National Commission for United Nation Education Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) handed over books and computers worth about K40 million.



Majawa (in grey suit) briefing Mkandawire inside Mzuni ‘interim’ Libray as Ridley looks on – Pic by Yohane Chideya, Mana
UNESCO’s donation follows a request it made to Mzuzu University for the types of books the University would need shortly after the institution’s library services were disrupted by the fire which gutted down the library on December 18, 2015.
With the positive response donors, including UNESCO, are demonstrating since the fire incident, the University authorities strongly believe the library services will be “close to normal” by the time the new academic year starts in September.
Handing over the donation at Mzuni Campus, Executive Secretary of Malawi National Commission for UNESCO, Dr Francis Mkandawire, said the library plays a vital role in the life of any academic institution.
“Despite the move away from print and towards electronic resources, the library continues to fulfill its role as the heart of the university.
“The work the library undertakes contributes directly to the institution’s academic mission,” said Dr Mkandawire.
He added the library also equips students with skills and knowledge they need to achieve academically and maximize their employability.
Mzuzu University’s Vice Chancellor, Dr Robert Ridley, received the donation and commended the Malawi National Commission for UNESCO for the gesture on behalf of the university.
He said it was interesting that a few days after the tragic fire incident, the national commission (for UNESCO) asked his institution for a list of books it would need for the library.
Ridley stated that since the library was burnt down by the fire, donations worth millions of Kwacha have been made from within and outside the country which had assisted the University to reorganize the library so that in few months after the tragedy, the university had a functional library in what used to be an entertainment hall.
“They [UNESCO] responded within days after the tragedy and asked us what books were required,” he said.
In the past, UNESCO has supported Mzuzu University with laboratory equipment and technicalities for Open and Distance Learning Programme.
The organization has also worked with the university through its children’s library where the children conducted a range of outreach programmes designed to promote literacy.
Meanwhile, another consignment of books from a University in Ireland has already arrived in the country, according to Mzuzu University Librarian Felix Majawa.
Mzuzu University library caught fire from an electrical spark in the building which led to the destruction of about 45,000 books, computers and other learning resources worth about K 3 billion.
The incident left the institution’s 4,000 students and the surrounding communities to be in a state of shock.
On the possibility of constructing a new library building, the Vice Chancellor has said it is a big challenge as it will require billions of Kwacha which cannot be sourced from a single donor.
 

Watch Emmie Kankweche featuring Dan Lu in ‘Thank You Lord’ single


Musician Emmie Kankweche who had gone quiet four years ago has resurfaced with a new offering titled “Thank You Lord”. The song features her man, celebrated afro pop singer, Dan Lu.
The singer released the new track with a video on June 9 under Dan Lu’s Rockers Records.



This is Emmie’s comeback into the music industry. We have recorded an album but because she has been out if the scene we will release a few singles before we launch the album,” disclosed Dan Lu in an interview.
The Blantyre-based singer-cum-business lady released her previous album “Ndaomboledwa” in 2012. This project had popular tracks such as “Palibe Ofananaye” and “Ndiwamoyo”.
In a separate interview, Emmie indicated she was now focused on reviving her music career under the guidance of Dan Lu.
“I was busy with business but now am free. I’m working with Dan Lu who is taking care of my music journey [and] that will help me concentrate,” she explained.
 

Watch MP’s reaction on Kabwila’s arrest: Malawi WhatsApp coup plot


This video some legislators trying to remove roadblocks that the police had amounted at  the National Assembly as they waited to arrest opposition Malawi Congress Party (MCP) spokesperson and  Salima North West member of Parliament (MP) Jessie Kabwila and Lilongwe South West MP PeterChakhwantha. Kabwila was arrested and charged with sedition on what MCP claims are trumped up charges over a discussion on WhatsApp group that government insists was about overthrowing President Peter Mutharika. The President is facing calls to resign.- Video courtesy of NPL




