Chakwera calls for action on Malawi ‘grand corruption’ scandal: No impunity

The opposition Malawi Congress Party President, Dr Lazarus Chakwera has advised the Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) to quickly act on t the network responsible for biggest financial scandal in Malawi’s history. Known as “cashgate”,  after there have been fears that about seven ministers who are implicared will escape justice.
Chakwera says no impunity in delaing with grand corruption
Chakwera said  those involved in the scandal  should not  escape the reach of the law even if they are  in the corridors of power.
The opposisiton leader said this while addressing a political rally at Thavite School Ground in the area of Traditional Authority Mwanza in Salima District.
“We are told that the office of the Auditor General has handed over the forensic audit [conducted by RSM Risk Assurance LLP of the UK covering 2009 to 2014 ]  report to the ACB. The ACB should quickly act on the report despite that some people are still working under fear of seeing what their friend  Issa Njaunju saw, do your job,” said Chakwera.
He was apparently referring the the murder of ACB official Njaunju whose investigations police say is complicated as many believed it was regime thugs who took away his life in a brutual manner.
Chakwera said Malawians are keenly waiting for action for all the shoddy deals that involved civil servants and businesses.
The reports says there are $14.2 million in overpayments for goods and services; one duplicate payment of $5.45 million which the report says should be subject to immediate recovery; and $29 166 overpayment on shipping to wrong locations.



Chakwera said “there should be no impunity” for those involved in stealing from the state.
“That’s why if we are asking ACB to conclude the what Auditor General has already found bring all the culprits to book so , lets endt a culture of impunity,” said Chakwera.
Chakwera said Malawi Civil Service was very trusted in the Kamuzu Banda regime.
“Go in locations you will find that the former Civil Servants are poor and compare them with the current civil servants they are already rich even after working for few years, where are they getting money? ” said Chakwera.
“The new crop of civil servants are driving top range of vehicles, building good houses, they are stealing your money.”
Chakwera then demonstrated a practical example of corruption at GreenBelt  Authority(GBA).
“We have been passing budget for GBA for long time but have you benefited from the initiative you people of Salima,” queried Chakwera.
Chakwera has since advised President Peter Mutharika to address the corruption which is draining a lot of public resources.
“ The money  that is wrongfully been used for self-enrighment should be used to help reduce poverty in Malawi and to raise living standards for all citizens,” said Chakwera.
Parliament  is, through the Public Accounts Committee, reportedly supposed to further debate the ‘grand corruption’ forensic report with the Auditor Genearl this week.
Civil society is demanding President Mutharika to sack the ministers implicated in the mismanagement of the funds.
However, many believe it is more likely that Malawians will see the culprits being prosecuted, including the role of ministers and senior officials in the Mutharika-led government.
The forensic audit of the financial years 2009-2014 was carried out in two phases. In a first phase, PwC on behalf of the National Audit Office of Malawi checked whether the statements from government bank accounts matched with entries in Ifmis.
The analysis showed that 43 percent of payments reflected in the government bank statements were not accounted for in Ifmis.
These are $14.2 million in overpayments for goods and services; one duplicate payment of $5.45 million which the report says should be subject to immediate recovery; and $29 166 overpayment on shipping to wrong locations.

