Evangelist Kalonga wins international special recognition award

A prophet is without honour in his or her own homeland, they say, and it may sound an overused and somewhat boring cliché but this adage cannot be further from the truth for UK-based Malawian female charismatic preacher, Evangelist Elizabeth Kalonga.
Kalonga speaking after getting an award
Award winners show
While her compatriots from the homeland, Malawi vilify and exaggeratedly overlook her and her philanthropic services to mankind, the international community recognises and appreciates her concerted efforts and hard work towards her contribution to helping the needy and her services to mankind.
Evangelist Kalonga may not have the honour and recognition she duly deserves among her countrymen and women but the international community acknowledges her efforts and appreciates her acts of benevolence, selflessness and dedication to her services onto the humankind.
The outspoken woman of God, Evangelist Kalinga has been decorated with the 2016 glamorous International Extraordinary Lady Speaks Conference Star humanitarian Award for being one of the most outstanding women in Africa and for dedicating her life to  helping and giving hope to people living with HIV and Aids, the disabled, deprived Children and vulnerable African women both in the UK and in Malawi.
Founder and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) for in Love and Faith Project, a UK registered charity, received her gong at the weekend in London at a white carpet event which attracted a myriad host of motivational speakers and humanitarians and notable personalities on the global stage.
“I am so humbled and at the same time overwhelmingly honoured for winning this award. This is a great moment for me and a great achievement for the people I serve because they are the real winners of this award,” said a visibly ecstatic Pastor Kalonga.
She added: “For me, God called me to his ministry to do his work and I am elated and overly content that in a small way I can help change other people’s lives for the better through God’s works. I am not qualified to do the work rather God qualifies my work for the good of mankind. Glory be to God.”
Luton based Evangelist Kalonga thanked the organisers of the event for the honour saying the award gives her courage and enthusiasm to continue doing the Lord’s work.
“This award gives me the much-needed oomph and drive to forge ahead and even do more. I would like to register my heartfelt gratitude to the organisers of the awards for recognising and appreciating what we do,” said Evangelist Kalonga.
During the awards presentation, another prestigious award was handed over to Imambay Kadie Kamara, the founder and chief executive the for an international NGO for the disabled people, The disabled foundation international, Sierra Leone.



The International  Extraordinary lady Speaks Conference is a day dedicated to hearing the amazing stories of highly inspirational women who implemented strength, willpower and resilience to overcome adversity and go on to enrich not just their lives but the lives of all those around them.
The highlight of the event was the Lift Effect STAR awards presented to women who had been nominated by those whose lives they had significantly impacted upon and above all else, among the STAR award recipients were some outstanding women who gave amazing presentations.
Of late, Kalonga has been vocal fighting injustices against and rigorously promotes the rights of people living with HIV and Aids, Gays and Lesbians (homosexuals) people with albinism, the disabled, vulnerable children and women.
Recently the flamboyant cleric argued President Peter Mutharika and the Malawi government to engage an extra gear in the fight against the ongoing senseless killings of people with albinism saying enough of lip service has been paid and that now is the time to act tough.
Evangelist Kalonga appealed to the faith leaders, NGO’s and the traditional authorities in the country to get back to basics teaching them to love ane another and to always trust and ensure that there is love and faith among the commonest of the citizenry in the country.

