Malawi dual citizenship, President orders Justice Minister to draft  legislation

President Peter Mutharika has said he has ordered his Justice minister Samuel Tembenu to draft a dual citizenship legislation to allow Malawians stuck in diaspora come back home and invest.
President Peter Mutharika : Malawi dual citizenship on the cards
Mutharika told the state controlled Malawi Broadcasting Corporation that the ministry of Justice is currently working on the legislation which will enable Malawians hold dual citizenship.
The President said he will live to his promise he made in parliament romise that government will review dual citizenship law.
“We are currently drafting the legislation, very soon we will have the legislation. This will be possible because we want Malawians in diaspora to come to Malawi,” he said.
On the country’s economy, Mutharika said although the kwacha has stabilised, the inflation and high interest rates remain high.
“We are working on these,” said Mutharika.
He could however not give a difinite answer as to when exactly the economy is expected to be back on his feet.
However he said the government is is luring more investors as way of giving dosage to the sick economy so that it can recover.
“There is no way the economy can improve without investment. I can assure Malawians that we are putting thge structures in place to put the economy back,” he said.
Some sections of the society have blamed the president for chartering a presidential jet when the economy is on sick bed and most ordinary Malawians do not know when they will get their next meal and public hospitals continue to turn back sick people due to lack of drugs.
Mutharika recently chartered a South African plane to Ethiopia where he received a doctorate. Mustafa Hussein, lecturer at University of Malawi’s Chancellor College, described the president’s actions as regrettable.



Due to the ailing state of Malawi’s economy, Mutharika has been forced to utilise passenger planes in recent times, with his bag having gone missing during one of his international trips.
The President’s comments also come at a time when electricity and water continue to be a night mare.
 
 
 

