Poly journalism symposium Friday at Mount Soche

Final year Bachelor of Arts in Journalism students at the Polytechnic of the University of Malawi will on Friday July, 8, 2016 hold a symposium at Sunbird Mount Soche in Blantyre to showcase their newly acquired skills and knowledge to prospective employers and clients in corporate world.
Carol Maziya
Chairperson for the symposium organizing committee Carolyn Maziya said the symposium will be held under the theme “Geared towards Media Innovations and Entrepreneurship” and will bring together students, academic staff and representatives of various companies and organisations for a lively seminar aimed at introducing the prospective journalism graduates to future employers and clients.
“You may have noted that we are also referring to representatives of companies and organisations as prospective clients and not just as employers because we believe entrepreneurship is another avenue the students have to pursue after their studies,” said Maziya.
“One of the modules we covered during our studies is a new one called Special Projects where every student come up with an examinable new and innovative media product,” said Maziya.
She said during the symposium, the students will make presentations and displays showcasing some of the innovations.
The guest of honour at the symposium is expected to be the chief executive officer of TNM or his representative who will talk about how journalism graduates can use mobile phone technology and the Internet to set up enterprises and come up with innovations in Malawi’s media.
MCA-Malawi will also make a presentation on the importance of the US$350 million USA-funded Compact Programme for Malawi through which funding is being provided towards various energy sector projects and reform programmes.



There will also be a presentation from a model media entrepreneur who will share knowledge and experience as well as motivate and inspire the students on the possibilities of setting up enterprises, even with limited or no capital at all.
The class has 48 students, who include 8 in the mature entry programme who did their studies during weekends.
The main sponsor for the symposium is TNM. The Millennium Challenge Account-Malawi (MCA-M), the Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (Macra), the Technical Vocational Educational and Training Authority (Teveta) and Carlsberg Malawi have also provide financial and material support towards the symposium.

