Prophet Bushiri’s Bible Up-Close:Pray often, God is listening

Prayer comes in different forms and dimensions, but it is all one act; talking with God. The fact that we are spiritual beings in the physical makes prayer an essential tool in our daily lives for triumph, because the dark spiritual forces are relentlessly attacking, meditating and planning deep on how to set snares against us.



With his snares, the devil is up on a mission to entice you into committing his will. He is relentless on his efforts to enslave you in poverty and sickness as well as force a premature death upon you the child of God. But the grace of God has not surpassed your protection. We read in Jeremiah 29:11 that God gives us victory over sin and death through our Lord Jesus Christ. His presence is our rock, and we know that no one can harm us except He allows it. As _*Lamentations 3:22-23*_ declares, through the Lord’s mercies we are not consumed, bcause His compassions fail not.
We are at war. Successiful soldiers never chill up in the battlefield. We can’t take our blankets along when all we need are weapons of mass destruction. Weapons with which to repel the dark forces. This weapon is the prayer to our faithful and victorious God who made this victory available to us through our Lord Jesus Christ as confirmed in *_1 Corinthians 15:57._*
While the prayer really changes things situations to our favour, we dearly need to understand how it does that. Honest Prayer to the Lord can be that Anti-Barristic missile in your life. It can be your Bazooka if you align it with reading of the Bible. The reason why satan catches you easily sometimes, is beacause he never sleeps in studying you, but you don’t even study the Bible that much. Failure to read the Bible with understanding is tantamount to you, as a soldier, chilling in the battle field. Do you expect to overcome when you pray in your blankets, falling asleep before you even finish? Wake up! _”Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour,” 1 Peter 5:8. KJV_
With a positive thinking, you can change your life around. You can triumph over the devil. I was teaching about the Rayoni anointing this other day. It is important to Noema your visions’ execution with prayer. Heaven has opened and God is ready for your prayers. The blood of Jesus on the cross weakened the chains so that they are easily broken at your prayer. The blood of Jesus has allowed you and I to overcome the evil one. Don’t let him set up snares for you again. God is waiting for your prayers as He says in _*Jeremiah 29:12*_ that; _”Then you will call on me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you”._  God is confirming His commitment toward our victory in _*John 16:33*_ where He says _”I have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. In this world you will have trouble. But take heart! I have overcome the world.”_
The Lord has overcome the world and victory belongs to him *[Jeremiah 29:11].* If you are a Christian and a child of God, it means you have a character of an overcomer. You cannot continue to live in defeat when you have the DNA of God. You cannot continue to live in poverty when silver and gold are His. You cannot be sick and lack healing when you have the healer inside of you. Pray and God is waiting to hear you say you need Him. Pray and He is there to answer your prayers. A prayerful person is a successful person for he follows instructions of the Lord.
As you start a new prayer life, it is vital to have positive thoughts. The Rayoni anointing works best in such an environment, and executing these thoughts and visions will invite God to work out things for your good, blessing you with Noema. “Rejoice always, pray without ceasing, give thanks in all circumstances; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you.” _*[1 Thess 5:16-18 ESV].*

