Tempers flare in Malawi Parliament: Kaliati’s denies making cashgate slurs

Tempers flared high on Monday as opposition legislators demanded an apology from Information minister Patricia Kaliati who accused the  opposition MCP and PP legislators of being silent since the K577 billion report came out.
Kaliati: Denied making slurs
Vitus Dzoole Mwale, Lilongwe Msozi South MP (MCP) brought to the attention of Speaker Richard Msowoya that Kaliati had mumrmured something out of the microphone.
“I want her to stand up and say it here so that I can answered her now,” said the seemingly angry Mwale.
Mwale said the minister accused him of taking part in the loot of the money, saying this was why the Malawi Congress Party (MCP)  legislator was silent.
“These are very serious allegations Mr Speaker. Malawians are suffering out there because of the looting of this money and connect me to this is very unfair,” he said.
But Kaliati stood to protest that she did not make any slurs.
“Mr Speaker Sir , what is it that  I have said for the honourable members to say things like that,” querried Kaliati.
The Speaker said he didnt hear the minister making any comment.
On his part, Peoples Party leader in the House Uladi Mussa demanded that the House sets aside the debate on Land Bill and start debate on the K577 billion ‘grand corruptuon’ scandal.
The emotionally charged Mussa, who is also Salima South MP, had to be calmed by Speaker Richard Msowoya who asked the charismatic politician to cool down and behave as leader in the House.



Kaliati is alleged to have said that the MCP and PP parliamentarians were mum on the matter because the report says most of the K577 billion was looted during the Joyce Banda regime.
Leader of the House told the opposition that it was a waste of tax payers money to derail debate on Land bill and start infighting for an issue outside the program.
However, Speaker Msowoya, who stamps authority in the 193 strong House said it was Kaliati, a government minister who provoked the situation.
He however calmed the situation and debate on the Land bill continued smoothly.
The audit of the ‘grand corruption’ says there are $14.2 million in overpayments for goods and services; one duplicate payment of $5.45 million which the report says should be subject to immediate recovery; and $29 166 overpayment on shipping to wrong locations.

