TNM opens new flagship shop in Balaka

As one way of fulfilling its goals of ensuring wide coverage, premier mobile network and ICT service provider, TNM is pleased to announce the official opening of its Balaka flagship shop.
Now open ! Balaka shop
Mateawuma waving a ribbon after official opening.
The Balaka shop is one of 26flagship shops that TNM has opened this year across the country in a bid to bring its product and services closer to its customers.
Speaking during the official opening TNM‘s Chief Commercial  Officer, Daniel Makata said the opening of the Balaka shop aims to provide convenience to customers as it is strategically opposite NBS Bank at the heart of Balaka town.
“The new shop provides more space and therefore increase our customer care touch points. We are always thriving to improve the customer experience through provision of a customer-friendly and centric environment by bringing services closer to our valued customers,” said Makata.
He said the shop will support Balaka with its mobile and ICT needs and those of travelers.
Apart from hosting government, civil society, SME and agri-enterprises, Balaka is also a gateway to Lake Malawi, the M1 road as well as Zomba City, Malawi’s major academic centre.
Makata said TNM has extended shop opening hours to give more time for customers to transact at the new shop.
“Initially TNM shops were opening at 7:30 am and closing at 5:00 pm but now they will be opening at 7:30 am and closing at 7:00 pm. We hope this will cater for the increase in demand of our services as we bring it closer to customers and serve them better” said the Chief Commercial Officer.



Balaka District Commisioner, Rodrick Mateawuma hailed TNM for the timely business decision to set shop in Balaka. He said Balaka is a fast growing town and district as it plays host various government ministries and departments, local and international NGOs as well as a booming cotton industry among others and deserved the TNM presence a long time ago.
“Previously most of these services could only be accessible either in Ntcheu or Zomba. I wish to applaud TNM for the sound business decision to invest in Balaka. I can assure you that this shop has timely responded to our need and there could never have been a better time to move into Balaka than now,” said Mateawuma.
Services available at the Balaka shop include all Mpamba transactions, sim card replacements, airtime purchases, general inquiries and other TNM related services. The other shops have been opened in Blantyre, Zomba, Nchalo,Lilongwe, Ntcheu,Kasungu,Mangochi,Mzimba and Mzuzu among others.

